Chapter-92-Keep-Forever

SUDDENLYTHE DOOR, which was always crashed shut, opened quite
noiselessly.
The long-faced guard stood in the narrow opening and from inside the cell,
not from the corridor, asked in a menacing growl: “What’s all this banging?”
Innokenty was relieved. If the guard was not afraid to enter, there was no risk
of poisoning yet.
“I’m not feeling well!” he said hesitantly. “Give me some water!”
“Well, just remember,” the guard said sternly, “no banging, in any
circumstances; otherwise, you’ll be punished.”
“But what if I feel ill? If I need to call somebody?”
“And don’t raise your voice! What you do if you need to call somebody,” the
guard explained in his sullen drawl, “is you wait till the peephole opens and
raise a finger without speaking.”
He backed out and locked the door.
The machine beyond the wall started up, then fell silent.
The door opened again, this time with a clatter. It dawned on Innokenty that
they were trained to open doors noisily or quietly as required.
The guard gave him a mug of water.
“Listen,” said Innokenty, taking the mug. “I’m unwell, I need to lie down.”
“Not allowed in the box.”
“Where? Not allowed where?” (He needed to talk to somebody; even this
blockhead would do.)
But the guard had already backed out of the cell and was closing the door.
Innokenty pulled himself together.
“Listen, call your superior officer! Why have I been arrested?”
The door was locked.
(“In the box,” he had said, using the English word. So that’s their cynical
term for this sort of cell? Accurate enough, I suppose.)
Innokenty took a sip of water. He lost his thirst at once. The mug’s capacity
was three hundred grams; it was enameled, greenish, with a strange picture of
a cat wearing glasses, pretending to read a book, but furtively eyeing a cheeky
bird hopping around nearby.
They couldn’t, surely, have chosen this picture especially for the Lubyanka?
But how apt it was! The cat was the Soviet regime, the book the Stalin
Constitution, and the sparrow a thinking individual.
Innokenty could not suppress a wry smile, and this suddenly brought home to
him the immensity of the disaster that had befallen him.
He would never have believed himself capable of smiling after less than a
half hour in the Lubyanka’s dungeons.
(It was worse for Shchevronok in the neighboring box; it would have taken
more than that cat to raise a smile from him right then.)
Moving his overcoat to make room, Innokenty put the mug on the table.
The lock clattered. The door opened. A lieutenant entered holding a piece of
paper. The sergeant’s joyless face could be seen behind him.
Innokenty, in his dove gray diplomatic uniform embroidered with gold palm
leaves, rose unhurriedly to meet him.
“Listen, Lieutenant, what is this all about? Is there some misunderstanding?
Let me see the warrant; I didn’t read it properly.”
“Surname?” the lieutenant asked tonelessly, looking glassy-eyed at Innokenty.
“Volodin,” Innokenty conceded, eager to clarify the situation.
“First name, patronymic?”
“Innokenty Artemievich.”
“Year of birth?” The lieutenant kept referring to his piece of paper.
“1919.”
“Place of birth?”
“Leningrad.”
And with that, just when the time for explanations had arrived and the
counselor, second class, was expecting them, the lieutenant withdrew and the
door closed, almost pinching the counselor.
Innokenty sat down and shut his eyes. He was beginning to feel the power of
those mechanical claws.
The machine started humming.
Then silence.
Things great and small came into his mind, all of them so urgent an hour ago
that his legs ached to be up and doing.
Here in the box there was no room to take a single full step, let alone to run.
The flap of the spy hole moved. Innokenty raised a finger. The door was
opened by the woman with blue epaulets and a stupid, heavy face.
“I want to . . . you know,” he said meaningfully.
“Hands behind your back! Move it!” the woman snapped, and Innokenty,
obeying her nod, went out into the corridor, which seemed pleasantly cool after
the stuffiness of the box.
After a short walk the woman nodded at a door.
“In here!”
He went in. The door was locked behind him.
There was an aperture in the floor and two iron footrests. Otherwise, the
minimal floor space and the walls of this little cell were covered with red
tiles. Water splashed refreshingly in the depths.
Glad that here at least he would get a rest from uninterrupted surveillance,
Innokenty squatted.
But he heard a click from the other side of the door, looked up, and saw that
here, too, there was a conical spy hole and that the importunate eye was
watching him closely, not at intervals but continuously.
Embarrassed, Innokenty stood up. The door was flung open before he could
raise his finger to say “Ready.”
“Hands behind! Move!” the woman said calmly.
Back in the box, Innokenty felt a sudden need to know the time. Unthinkingly,
he pulled back his cuff, but “the time” was no longer there.
He sighed and began studying the cat on the mug, but before he got lost in
thought, the door was unlocked, and someone new, a fat-faced, broadshouldered
fellow in a gray smock, asked him his name.
“I’ve already answered that!” Innokenty said indignantly.
“Name?” the newcomer repeated tonelessly, like a radio operator calling
another station.
“Oh, well—Volodin.”
“Pick up your things. Walk,” Gray Smock said impassively.
Innokenty took his overcoat and cap from the little table and walked. He was
pointed toward the room he had entered first and in which his epaulets had
been ripped off and his watch and notebooks taken from him.
The pocket handkerchief was no longer lying on the floor.
“Listen, my belongings have been taken from me,” he complained.
“Undress!” was the reply from the guard in the gray smock.
Innokenty was flabbergasted. “What for?” he asked.
The guard looked him sternly in the eye.
“You Russian?” he asked harshly.
“Yes.” Innokenty, never at a loss for words, could think of nothing else to
say.
“Undress!”
“Don’t non-Russians have to, then?” A dismal attempt at humor.
The guard maintained a stony silence and waited.
Innokenty assumed a contemptuous smile, shrugged, sat down on the stool,
took off his shoes, then his uniform, and offered it to the guard. He attached no
ritual importance to uniforms, but nonetheless felt a certain respect for his
gold-trimmed garments.
“Drop it!” said Gray Smock, pointing to the floor.
Innokenty hesitated. The guard wrested the tawdry uniform from him, flung it
on the floor, and barked: “Naked!”
“What d’you mean, naked?”
“Naked!”
“But that’s completely impossible, Comrade. It’s cold here, you know!”
“You’ll be stripped forcibly,” the guard warned him.
Innokenty thought awhile. They had assaulted him once, and it looked as
though they would assault him again. Shivering with cold and disgust, he
removed his silk underwear and obediently tossed it onto the same heap.
“Socks off!”
Innokenty removed his socks and stood barefoot on the wooden floor. His
legs were hairless and a delicate white, like the rest of his unresisting body.
“Open your mouth. Wider. Say ‘Aah.’ Again, longer—‘Aaa-aaa-aaah!’ Now
raise your tongue.”
As though Innokenty were a horse for sale, the guard’s dirty fingers plucked
at one of his cheeks, then the other, the pouch under one eye, the pouch under
the other, reassured himself that nothing was hidden under the tongue, inside
the cheeks, or in the eyes, tipped Innokenty’s head back with a firm push, so
that the light shone into his nostrils, inspected both ears, tugging at the lobes,
ordered him to spread his fingers, ascertained that there was nothing between
them, and made him flap his arms to check that there was nothing under his
armpits either. Then, in the same unanswerable robotic voice: “Take your
member in your hands. Turn back the skin. Farther. Right, that’s enough. Move
your member to the right and upward. To the left and upward. Right, let go.
Stand with your back to me. Legs apart. Wider. Bend over and touch the floor.
Legs wider apart. Part your buttocks with your hands. Right. Good. Now squat.
Quickly! Once more!”
Whenever he had thought about being arrested, Innokenty had visualized a
furious intellectual dual with Leviathan—the state. He was keyed up, ready to
defend heroically his life and beliefs. He had never imagined that it would all
be so crude, so stupid—and so ineluctable. The people waiting for him in the
Lubyanka, low-ranking, obtuse people were uninterested in him as an
individual and in the act that had brought him there but had a zealous concern
for trivialities that took him by surprise and left him helpless. And anyway,
what form could resistance take, and where would it get him? The repeated
demands they made on him seemed so insignificant compared with the great
battle ahead that it was not worth digging his heels in—but the details of this
nonsensical procedure taken together served to break the will of the newly
arrested prisoner.
So Innokenty bore all these indignities in dejected silence.
The searcher silently indicated a stool nearer the door, on which Innokenty,
still naked, was to sit. He disliked the idea of contact between his naked body
and this new cold object. But as soon as he sat down, he was pleasantly
surprised to find that the wooden stool seemed to impart some warmth.
Innokenty had experienced many acute pleasures in his life, but this was
something new. Pressing his elbows to his chest and drawing his knees up
higher, he felt still warmer.
While he sat like that, the searcher stood over the heap of clothing, shaking,
probing, holding things up to the light. He was kind enough not to detain the
underpants and socks for long. With the underpants he just felt along the ribs
and seams, pinch by pinch, then tossed them at Innokenty’s feet. The socks he
detached from their elastic garters, turned inside out, and tossed to Innokenty.
After feeling the seams and folds of the undershirt, he tossed that, too, in the
direction of the door, so that Innokenty could now dress, making his body still
more blissfully warm.
The searcher then took out a big pocket knife with a crude wooden handle,
opened it, and got to work on the shoes. He disdainfully ejected the fragments
of pencil and repeatedly flexed the soles with a look of intense concentration,
searching for anything hard concealed there. Slitting the insole with his knife,
he did in fact tease out a small piece of steel and placed it on the table. Then
he picked up an awl and drove it right through one heel.
Innokenty watched him intently as he worked and was able to think how sick
he must get of fingering other people’s underwear, cutting up their footwear,
and peering into their back passages year after year. That must be why the
searcher had such a grim, forbidding look on his face.
But the misery and tedium of watching and waiting snuffed out these
flickerings of ironic thought. The searcher began stripping the gold facings, the
service buttons, and collar tabs from Innokenty’s uniform. Then he slit open the
lining and felt under it. He took as long again over the creases and seams of
Innokenty’s trousers. The winter overcoat gave him still more trouble; deep
down in the padding he seemed to hear a rustle, not that of padding (a note
sewn in there? addresses? an ampoule of poison?), and ripping open the lining,
he searched lengthily, wearing a look of such concentration and concern that he
might have been operating on a human heart.
The search took a long time, perhaps over an hour. At last, the searcher
gathered up his trophies: braces, elastic garters (he had already told Innokenty
that these were not allowed in prison), tie, tiepin, cuff links, the piece of steel
from the welt of his shoe, two fragments of pencil, the gold facings, all the
decorations from the uniform, and several buttons. Only then did Innokenty
fully realize how thoroughly the man had done his destructive work. Of all the
indignities heaped upon him that evening, the worst was not the slits in the
soles of his shoes, not the ripped lining, not the padding sticking out from the
armpits of his overcoat; no, the absence of almost all of his buttons when they
had already deprived him of suspenders was the affront that Innokenty felt most
acutely.
“Why have you cut off my buttons?” he exclaimed.
“Not allowed,” the guard growled.
“What do you mean? How am I supposed to go around, then?”
“Tie yourself up with string,” the man answered sullenly, already at the door.
“What nonsense is this? What string? Where am I supposed to get it from?”
But the door was slammed and locked.
Innokenty refrained from knocking and arguing. He had to think himself lucky
that they had left him buttons on his overcoat and one or two elsewhere.
He was proving to be a quick learner.
He had not had long to enjoy the spaciousness of his new quarters, clutching
his trouser tops as he walked around to stretch his legs, when the key grated in
the lock again and a new guard appeared. This one wore a white smock—not,
however, of the first freshness. He looked at Innokenty as if he were some
long-familiar object that had always been in this room and abruptly ordered
him to strip naked.
Innokenty wanted to answer indignantly, to sound threatening, but he was
choking with resentment and could only utter a feeble squawk of protest.
“But I’ve just stripped once! Couldn’t somebody have warned me?”
Obviously not, because the new arrival simply waited with a blank, bored
look for him to carry out the order.
What surprised Innokenty most in those he met here was their ability to
remain silent where normal people usually respond.
He was getting used to the rhythmic routine of implicit and automatic
obedience. He took off his shoes and undressed.
“Sit!”
The guard pointed to the stool on which Innokenty had sat for so long
already.
The naked prisoner sat submissively without wondering why. (The free
man’s habit of thinking over his actions before performing them was atrophying
fast, now that others were thinking so effectively for him.) The guard’s fingers
gripped the nape of the prisoner’s neck roughly. The cold cutting edge of a
machine was pressed hard against the top of his head.
Innokenty winced.
“What are you doing?” he said, making a feeble effort to free himself from
the clutching fingers. “What right have you to do this? I’m not under arrest yet.”
(He meant that he had not been formally charged.)
But the barber did not relax his grip. He went on shearing. The spark of
rebellion fizzled out. The proud young diplomat, used to alighting nonchalantly
from intercontinental aircraft, gazing absently through half-closed eyes at the
daytime dazzle of bustling European capitals, was now merely a naked male
person, all skin and bones, and with a half-shaven head.
Innokenty’s silky light-brown hair fell as sadly and soundlessly as
snowflakes. He caught one wisp and rubbed it gently between his fingers. He
was full of love for himself and the life that was leaving him.
He remembered deciding that submissiveness would be interpreted as an
admission of guilt. He remembered resolving to resist, to protest, to argue, to
demand to see the prosecutor, but against all reason he was helpless, paralyzed
by the pleasurable indifference of a man freezing in the snow. The barber
finished shaving his head, then made him stand and raise his arms, one by one,
and shaved his armpits. He then squatted and began shaving off Innokenty’s
pubic hair. This was a new sensation. It tickled. Innokenty involuntarily shrank,
and the barber made an impatient noise.
“May I dress now?” Innokenty asked when the procedure was over.
But the barber left without a word, locking the door behind him.
A crafty inner voice told Innokenty not to get dressed in a hurry this time. He
felt an unpleasant prickling in the newly shaved tender spots. Running his hand
over a head that seemed unfamiliar (he could not remember being closecropped
since childhood), he felt a strange prickly stubble and bumps on his
skull that he had not known about.
He decided to put on his underwear, after all, and was about to slip into his
trousers when the lock rattled and yet another guard came in, one with a
purplish fleshy nose. He was carrying a large piece of cardboard.
“Name?”
“Volodin,” the prisoner answered. He had given up resisting these senseless,
sickening repetitions.
“First name and patronymic?”
“Innokenty Artemievich.”
“Year of birth?”
“1919.”
“Place of birth?”
“Leningrad.”
“Strip naked.”
Scarcely realizing what was happening, he took off the rest of his clothes.
His undershirt, which he had placed on the edge of the table, fell onto the dirty
floor, but he did not stoop to pick it up.
The purple-nosed guard inspected Innokenty minutely from various angles,
systematically recording his findings on his index card. His close attention to
birthmarks and facial details told Innokenty that these characteristics were now
a matter of record.
This one left in turn.
Innokenty sat limply on his stool and made no effort to dress.
The door rattled again. A stout, dark-haired woman in a snow-white smock
came in. Her face was coarse and forbidding, her comportment that of an
educated person.
Innokenty pulled himself together, reached quickly for his underpants and half
concealed his nakedness. But the woman darted a contemptuous, utterly
unfeminine glance at him and, thrusting even further her jutting lower lip,
asked, “You—have you got lice?”
Innokenty, offended, looked straight into her black eyes and, still holding his
underpants together in front of him, said, “I’m a diplomat.”
“What’s that got to do with anything? Do you have any complaints?”
“I want to know why I’ve been arrested! I want to read the warrant! I want to
see the prosecutor!” Innokenty blurted out.
The woman frowned.
“You misunderstood my question,” she said wearily. “No venereal
diseases?”
“What?”
“Have you ever had gonorrhea, syphilis, or soft chancre? Leprosy?
Tuberculosis? Any other complaints?”
She left without waiting for an answer.
The very first guard, the one with the long face, came in. Innokenty was
almost pleased to see him. This one had not insulted or harmed him.
“Why aren’t you getting your clothes on?” the guard asked gruffly. “Get
dressed quickly.”
Easier said than done! Alone and locked in again, Innokenty struggled to
keep his trousers up with no suspenders and several buttons missing. Unable to
draw on the experience of dozens of generations of prisoners, Innokenty knitted
his brow and solved the problem unaided—as millions of his predecessors
had done before him. He must use his shoelaces to tie around his waist and
hold his fly together. (Only now did he look closely enough to see that the
metal tips had been torn off his laces. Why did they go to such lengths?
Unknown to Innokenty, the Lubyanka’s standing orders allowed for the
possibility that a prisoner might use one of these tips as a suicide weapon.)
He did not even try to tie the jacket of his uniform together.
The sergeant looked through the spy hole to check that the prisoner was
dressed, unlocked the door, ordered him to keep his hands behind his back, and
led him to yet another room. There, Innokenty found his old acquaintance, the
guard with the purple nose.
“Shoes off!” he said by way of greeting.
This was no longer a problem; the shoes, now without laces, fell off unaided,
and the socks, without their elastic garters, slipped down around his ankles.
A contraption with a vertical white gauge for measuring height stood by the
wall. Purple-nose shepherded Innokenty toward it, lowered the movable bar
onto his head, and recorded his height.
“You can put your shoes on,” he said.
While the long-faced one at the door admonished him: “Hands behind your
back!”
Hands behind your back! Although Box No. 8 was only two steps away,
diagonally across the corridor.
Innokenty was locked up in his box again.
The mysterious machine on the other side of the wall was still alternately
revving up and falling silent.
Innokenty slumped limply onto the stool, holding his overcoat. From the
moment he had landed in the Lubyanka, he had seen nothing but blinding
electric light, cramped rooms between tight walls, and silent, impassive
jailers. The procedures, each more absurd than the last, seemed to him a cruel
farce. He did not realize that they formed a logically calculated sequence: the
preliminary body search by the operatives who arrested him; establishment of
the prisoner’s identity; receipt of the prisoner (not presented in person)
acknowledged by the prison administration; initial prison body search on
receipt; preliminary hygienic treatment; recording of marks on body; medical
examination. These procedures had left him dizzy, robbed him of his ability to
think straight and the will to resist. He was tormented now by one desire—to
sleep. He decided that they were leaving him in peace for the time being. His
first three hours in the Lubyanka had given him a new view of things, and he
saw that there was only one way to make himself at home: by putting the stool
on top of the table, throwing his exquisite overcoat with the astrakhan collar on
the floor, and lying down on it diagonally across the box. This meant that his
back was on the floor, his head raised and wedged awkwardly in one corner of
the box, and his legs, bent at the knees, twisted to fit into the opposite corner.
Still, for a little while, until his limbs became numb, it was bliss. But before he
could sink into a deep sleep, someone flung open the door, deliberately making
as much noise as possible.
A woman growled, “Get up!”
Innokenty scarcely batted an eyelid.
“Get up! Get up!” the voice overhead commanded.
“Suppose I want to sleep?”
“Get up!” the woman thundered, hovering over him like a Gorgon in a
nightmare.
From his contorted position, Innokenty had difficulty rising to his feet.
“So take me where I can lie down and sleep a bit,” he said feebly.
“Not permitted!” the Gorgon with the light blue epaulets snapped back and
slammed the door.
Innokenty propped himself up against the wall and waited while she opened
the spy hole—once, twice, three times—and studied him at length.
He took advantage of her departure to sink back onto his overcoat.
He was losing consciousness when the door crashed open again. Another big
strong fellow in a white smock stood on the threshold. He would have made a
heroic blacksmith or quarryman.
“Name?” he asked.
“Volodin.”
“Bring your things!”
Innokenty scooped up his coat and cap from the floor and, with eyes glazing
over, followed the guard on unsteady legs. He was utterly exhausted, and his
feet were so numb that he could not tell whether the floor beneath them was
even or not. He could hardly muster the strength to move and felt like lying
down right there in the middle of the corridor.
He was led through a narrow opening bashed in the thick wall into another,
dirtier corridor, where they opened a door into the anteroom to the shower
room, handed him a piece of coarse soap smaller than a matchbox, and ordered
him to wash.
Innokenty was reluctant to obey. He was used to tiled bathrooms with
surfaces like polished mirrors, and this wooden dressing room, which might
have seemed clean enough to most people, struck him as nauseatingly dirty. He
forced himself to find a sufficiently dry place on the bench, undressed, and
walked queasily over the wet grating that bore the prints of bare feet and
shoes. He would have been glad not to undress and wash at all, but the door of
the anteroom opened, and the blacksmith in the white smock ordered him to get
under the shower.
A flimsy, unprisonlike door with two unglazed slits in it opened onto the
shower room. There were four gratings, which Innokenty decided were also
dirty, and over them four showers. The hot and cold water were just right, but
Innokenty was not a bit grateful. Four showers for the use of one man! But
Innokenty felt no happier. (He might have appreciated his sixteenfold
advantage more if he had known that four men under a single shower was more
usual in the zek’s world.) The evil-smelling soap they had given him (he had
handled nothing like it in his thirty years, indeed had never realized that such a
thing existed) he had abandoned with a shudder in the dressing room. He
splashed about for a minute or two, mainly to wash off hairs left behind by the
clippers, which were prickling him in tender places, then, feeling that he had
not washed but gotten dirtier, went back to dress.
Or so he thought. But the benches in the dressing room were bare. His
splendid, though now mutilated, garments had been taken away, and only his
shoes remained, hiding their noses under benches. The outer door was locked,
and the spy hole was covered with its disk. All Innokenty could do was sit on
the bench, statuesquely naked, like Rodin’s Thinker, and meditate while he
dried off.
After a while, he was given coarse underwear, the worse for frequent
laundering, with the words “Inner Prison” stamped in black on the back and the
belly, and a square rag with a crisscross pattern bearing the same stamp and
folded in four, which he did not immediately identify as a towel. The buttons
on the undergarments were of stiffened cloth. Some buttons were missing, and
some of the tapes had been torn off. The skimpy drawers were too short and
too tight for Innokenty and pinched him between the legs. The shirt, on the other
hand, was very roomy, and the sleeves came down over his fingers. They
refused to exchange these underclothes, arguing that Innokenty had already
spoiled one set by putting them on.
Wearing his ill-fitting underwear, Innokenty was left sitting in the dressing
room for a long time. He was told that his outer garments were still in the
“cooker.” The word was new to Innokenty. Even during the war, when the
whole country was dotted with heat-sterilization rooms, he had never come
across them. But the “cooking” of his clothes was perfectly in line with the
senseless indignities inflicted on him that night. (He imagined a huge devil’s
frying pan.)
Innokenty tried soberly to consider his situation and what he should do. But
his thoughts were kaleidoscopic: The tight drawers, the frying pan in which his
tunic now lay, and the unblinking eye for which the lid of the spy hole
frequently made way chased one another and merged.
The shower had driven sleep away, but a murderous weakness overcame
him. He wanted to lie down on something dry and not cold, to lie there
motionless, recovering the strength that was draining from him. But he could
not bring himself to lie with his bare ribs against the wet, sharp-edged slats of
the bench (they did not even run parallel).
The door opened, but not because they had brought his clothes from the
cooker. At the shower room guard’s side stood a girl with a big red face in
civilian dress. Bashfully covering gaps in his underwear with his hands,
Innokenty walked to the doorway. The girl ordered him to sign a copy and
handed him a pink receipt—items received for storage this day, December 26,
by the Inner Prison of the USSR Ministry of State Security from Volodin, I. A.:
one yellow metal watch (number of watch, number of mechanism); one
fountain pen trimmed with yellow metal and with matching nib; one tiepin with
red stone inset; cuff links of blue stone, one pair.
Again, Innokenty waited, drooping. At last they brought his clothes. His
overcoat was returned cold and undamaged, but his tunic, trousers, and shirt
were crumpled, discolored, and still hot.
“Why couldn’t they be as careful with the uniform as with the overcoat?” he
asked indignantly.
“The coat has fur bits,” the blacksmith informed him. “Use your head!”
After heat sterilization, even his own clothes seemed alien and disgusting.
Clad from head to foot in strange and uncomfortable things, Innokenty was led
back to his Box No. 8.
He asked for water and twice greedily drained the mug with the picture of
the cat.
After this, another young woman visited him and, in return for his signature,
gave him a bright blue receipt reading: “this day, December 27, received by
the Inner Prison of the USSR Ministry of State Security from Volodin, I. A: one
silk undershirt, one pair silk drawers, suspenders, tie.”
The mysterious machine was still humming away.
Left locked in again, Innokenty folded his arms on the table, laid his head on
them, and tried to go to sleep sitting.
“Not allowed!” The door was unlocked by a new guard who had just taken
over.
“What isn’t?”
“Laying your head down!”
Innokenty’s muddled mind had expected worse.
Another document was brought, this one on white paper, acknowledging
receipt by the Inner Prison of the USSR Ministry of State Security of 123 (one
hundred twenty-three) rubles from Volodin, I. A.
Then another new face—a man in a blue smock over an expensive brown
suit.
Every time they brought a receipt, they asked his name. This time was no
exception. Surname? First name and patronymic? Year of birth? Place of birth?
After which, the visitor ordered: “All right—without.”
“Without what?”
“Without your gear. Hands behind your back!” In the corridor all orders were
given in a low voice so that those in other boxes would not hear.
Clicking his tongue at that invisible dog, the man in the brown suit led
Innokenty through the main exit, then along another corridor to a large room
unlike the rest of the prison; blinds were drawn over the windows, there was
soft furniture, and there were desks. Innokenty was made to sit on a chair in the
middle of the room. This, he thought, is when they interrogate me.
Deny it! Deny absolutely everything! Deny with all your might!
But instead of that, a brown box camera was trundled out from behind a
curtain, bright lights were switched on to left and right of Innokenty, and he
was photographed once full face and once in profile.
The head guard who had escorted Innokenty took the fingers of his right hand
one by one and pressed their tips against a sticky black cylinder that seemed to
be coated with marking ink, so that all five fingertips were black. Then, parting
Innokenty’s fingers to leave equal spaces between them, the man in the blue
smock pressed them heavily against a form and pulled them sharply away. Five
black prints with white whorls were left on the form.
The fingers of his left hand were smeared and printed in the same way.
Written on the form above the prints was “Volodin Innokenty Artemievich,
1919, Leningrad,” and above that in heavy black print, “KEEP
PERMANENTLY.”
Reading this instruction, Innokenty shuddered. There was something mystical
in it, something that looked beyond the human race and the planet Earth.
They gave him cold water, soap, and a little brush to wash his fingers. The
sticky dye was not easy to remove by these means; the cold water simply
trickled off it. Innokenty scrubbed his finger ends vigorously with the soaped
brush. He did not ask himself whether the fingerprinting should logically have
come before the bath.
Exhausted and disoriented, his brain was in the grip of that overpowering
cosmic formula: “KEEP PERMANENTLY”!