Chapter-36-Phonoscopy

ATNOON YAKONOVHIMSELF was missing from the velvety hush and glossy
comfort of his office. He was in Number Seven, officiating at the “wedding” of
the clipper and the scrambler. The idea of uniting those two devices, born that
morning in the mercenary mind of Markushev, had been snapped up by many
others who saw some advantage to themselves. Only Bobynin, Pryanchikov,
and Roitman were against it, and nobody listened to them.
Present in the office were Selivanovsky, General Bulbanyuk (representing
Ryumin), Marfino’s Lieutenant Smolosidov, and the prisoner Rubin.
Lieutenant Smolosidov was an unpleasant character. Perhaps you believe that
there is some good in every living creature? Your search for it in Smolosidov
would be rendered difficult by that unsmiling iron-hard stare and the sour twist
of those thick lips. He occupied one of the lowliest positions in his laboratory;
he was little more than a radio fitter, and he was paid no more than that of the
lowliest female employee, less than two thousand a month. True, he stole
another thousand from the institute in the form of the otherwise unobtainable
radio parts he sold on the black market, but everyone knew that there was more
than this to be said about Smolosidov’s position and income.
The free employees in the sharashka—even the friends with whom he played
volleyball—were afraid of him. They were frightened by his face, in which it
was impossible to awaken a spontaneous reaction. And by the special trust that
the highest authorities showed him. Where did he live? Did he in fact have a
home? A family? He never accepted invitations from colleagues, never shared
his leisure with them beyond the boundaries of the institute. He had three war
medals on his chest and in an unguarded moment had boasted that all through
the war Marshal Rokossovsky had not spoken a single word that he,
Smolosidov, had not heard. When asked how this could be, he replied that he
had been the marshal’s personal radio operator. Nothing more was known
about his past.
No sooner did the question arise as to which of the free workers could be
trusted with the red-hot secret tape than the minister’s inner office gave the
order: Smolosidov.
Smolosidov was now installing a tape recorder on a little varnished table,
and General Bulbanyuk, whose head was like a grotesquely overgrown potato
with three bulges for ears and nose, was saying:
“You, Rubin, are a prisoner. But you were a Communist once, and you may
be a Communist again some day.”
Rubin would have retorted, “I’m a Communist right now!” but trying to
convince Bulbanyuk of that was beneath his dignity.
“So the Soviet government and our Organs feel that they can trust you. The
tape you are going to hear contains a state secret of world importance. We
hope that you will help us to isolate this scoundrel who wants to see his native
land menaced by the atomic bomb. It goes without saying that if you make the
slightest attempt to divulge the secret, you will be annihilated. That clear?”
“Quite clear,” snapped Rubin, whose greatest fear now was that he might not
be allowed to hear the tape. Having lost all chance of private happiness long
ago, Rubin had made mankind at large his family. The tape he had yet to hear
was already of personal concern to him.
Smolosidov pressed the Playback button, and the quiet of the office was
broken by the dialogue between a slow-witted American and a desperate
Russian, with a faint rustling in the background. Rubin peered into the mottled
diaphragm of the loudspeaker as though straining to discern the features of this
enemy. Whenever he looked at anything so intently, his face became taut and
harsh. It would be no good begging for mercy from a man with a face like that.
After the words (in bad Russian), “Who are you? Say your name,” Rubin
threw himself back in his chair. He was a different man. He had forgotten that
others present were high-ranking officers, forgotten that it was a long time
since major’s stars had blazed on his shoulders. He relit his cigarette and
rapped out, “All right. Just once more.”
Smolosidov rewound the tape.
Everyone was silent. Everyone felt the touch of the fiery wheel.
Rubin chewed and mumbled the mouthpiece of his cigarette. He felt ready to
burst. Suddenly he, of all people, the dishonorably discharged Rubin, was
urgently needed! He, too, would have his chance to give Dame History a
helping hand! He was back at his post! Once more defending the World
Revolution!
Malignant Smolosidov hung over the tape recorder like a sullen dog.
Pompous Bulbanyuk, elbows on Anton’s spacious desk, supported his
imposing potato head in hands half hidden by his loose-skinned neck. From
what stock had this impenetrably complacent breed proliferated? From the
weed of Commie-cockiness, maybe? How quick and clever his comrades had
once been. Now the whole apparatus had fallen into the hands of these people.
And they were bulldozing the whole country along the road to perdition. How
could it have happened?
Rubin could not look at them. They disgusted him so much that he would
have liked to toss a hand grenade at them then and there, in that office, and
blow them to bits!
But, as things were, at this crossroads in history, they represented the
positive forces, embodying as they did the dictatorship, and the fatherland, of
the proletariat.
He must rise above his feelings! As hateful as they were, he must help them!
Hogs of this sort, from an Army-Group Political Department, had f lung
Rubin in jail because his cleverness and his honesty were more than they could
bear. Hogs of the same sort, in the Chief Military Prosecutor’s Department, had
in the space of four years tossed a dozen anguished protestations of innocence
from Rubin into the trash.
Yes, he must rise above his own unhappy lot! To save the idea! To rescue the
banner! To serve the world’s most advanced society!
The tape came to an end.
Rubin crushed his dead cigarette in an ashtray.
“All right. We’ll give it a try,” he said. “But if you haven’t got a suspect,
what are we looking for? We can’t tape the voices of everybody in Moscow.
Whose voice do we compare this with?”
Bulbanyuk reassured him: “We picked up four people on the spot, near the
telephone booth. But our man is most probably not one of them. There are five
people in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs who could have known. Not counting
Gromyko and one or two others, obviously. I’ve jotted down those five names,
without initials, titles, or the posts they occupy, so you needn’t be afraid to
accuse any one of them.”
He held out a page torn from a notebook. The names written on it were:
1. Petrov
2. Syagovity
3. Volodin
4. Shevronok
5. Zavarzin.
Rubin read the names and made as if to copy the list, but Selivanovsky
hastily prevented him.
“No, no! The list will be with Smolosidov.”
Rubin handed it back. He was not offended but amused by all these
precautions. As if the five names were not burned into his memory already!
Petrov! Syagovity! Volodin! Shevronok! Zavarzin! Linguistic speculation had
become a matter of habit with Rubin, and he had automatically registered the
derivation of the names Syagovity (“bouncy”) and Shevronok (= zhavoronok,
“skylark”).
“Please record other phone calls made by each of the five,” he said curtly.
“You’ll get them tomorrow.”
“Another thing. Put the age of each by his name.” Rubin thought a bit. “And a
list of the foreign languages he knows.”
Selivanovsky assented. “I’ve been wondering myself why he didn’t switch to
a foreign language. What sort of diplomat is he? Maybe he’s just very crafty?”
“Maybe our man got some uneducated simpleton to do it for him,” Bulbanyuk
said, slapping the table with his flabby hand.
“Whom could you trust with a job like that?”
“What we need to find out as quickly as possible,” Bulbanyuk explained, “is
whether the culprit is in fact one of these five. If he isn’t, we’ll try another five,
or another twenty-five for that matter!”
Rubin waited till he had finished and nodded at the tape recorder.
“I will need the tape the whole time, starting today.”
“It will be with Lieutenant Smolosidov. You and he will be allocated a room
to yourselves in the Top-Secret zone.”
“They’re clearing it now,” Smolosidov said.
Rubin’s service experience had taught him to avoid the dangerous word
“when,” in case he was asked the same question. He knew that there was only
work for a week or two in this, but that if you spun it out, it could be good for
months, whereas if you asked “When do you want it?” the bosses would say
“By tomorrow morning.” He asked a different question: “With whom can I
discuss this work?”
Selivanovsky exchanged a glance with Bulbanyuk and answered. “Only with
Major Roitman. With Foma Guryanovich. And with the minister himself.”
“You remember my warning?” Bulbanyuk asked. “Want me to repeat it?”
Rubin rose without asking permission, looked at the general through halfclosed
eyes as though he was something very, very small, and said to no one in
particular:
“I must go and think.”
Nobody objected.
Rubin’s face showed no emotion as he left the office. He walked unseeingly
past the duty officer and down the strip of red stair-carpet.
He would have to draw Gleb into this new group. He would need to talk
things over. The job would be a very difficult one. They had just barely begun
working on voices. Preliminary classification. Provisional terminology.
He looked forward to his research with a true scientist’s excitement.
This was, in effect, a new science: identifying a criminal by a voiceprint.
Till then, criminals had been identified by their fingerprints. That technique
was called “dactyloscopy”—“finger scanning”—and it had evolved over the
centuries.
The new science could be called “voice scanning” (that would be Sologdin’s
term), or “phonoscopy.” And it had to be created in a matter of days.
Petrov. Syagovity. Volodin. Shevronok. Zavarzin.