Chapter-28-The-Junior-Lieutenant’s-Job

WHEN HE HAD CITED his textbook definition of work, Junior Lieutenant
Nadelashin had not been untruthful. He was on duty for only twelve hours
every two days, but the work was exacting; it involved scurrying to and fro
between floors, and it was extremely responsible.
His spell of duty the previous night had proved more than usually
bothersome. He had reported for duty at 9:00 p.m., checked off the prisoners,
281 of them, as all present, supervised their exit to their places of work for the
evening, stationed sentries on the landing of the main staircase and in the
headquarters hallway, mounted a patrol under the windows of the special
prison, and was about to feed and billet the new arrivals when he was torn
away by a summons from the operations officer, Major Myshin, who for some
reason had not gone home.
Nadelashin was an exceptional person not only among jailers (or “prison
operatives,” as they were now called) but among his compatriots in general. In
a country where the words for “vodka” and “water” look as much alike as the
liquids themselves, Nadelashin never took a drop, even for a cold. In a country
where every other person has an advanced degree in obscene language from
the army or the camps, where the foulest words are used in the presence of
children, not only by drunks (and by children themselves at play), not only by
people fighting to get onto a bus at an out-of-town stop, but in intimate
conversation between friends, Nadelashin was not only unskilled in obscenity,
he did not even use words like “devil” and “scum.” He had just one little
saying when he was angry—“A bull should toss you!”—and he usually said it
under his breath.
On this occasion, too, he kept his “A bull should toss you” to himself as he
hurried off to see the major.
Operations Officer Myshin, whom Bobynin in his conversation with the
minister had unfairly described as a drone, the unhealthily obese, violet-
complexioned major, detained at “work” that Saturday evening by the
emergency, instructed Nadelashin
—to check whether the German and Latvian Christmas celebrations had
begun;
—to list by groups all those celebrating Christmas;
—to observe personally, and also by dispatching rank-and-file guards
every ten minutes, whether those celebrating drank wine, what they talked
about among themselves, and above all whether they indulged in antiSoviet
agitation;
—to discover if possible some deviation from prison routine and put a stop
to this unseemly religious debauch.
He did not say “put a stop to” but “as far as possible put a stop to. . . .”
Peacefully celebrating Christmas was not specifically forbidden, but Myshin’s
Bolshevik heart could not endure it.
Junior Lieutenant Nadelashin, his face like an impassive winter moon,
reminded the major that neither he nor, still less, his guards knew German, let
alone Latvian (indeed, their Russian wasn’t all that good).
Recalling that during his own four years of service as political officer of the
guard company in a camp for German prisoners of war, he had learned only
three German words (Halt! Zurück! and Weg!), Myshin abbreviated his
instructions.
Having received his orders and saluted clumsily, Nadelashin went off to
install the new arrivals, for which purpose he had a list, also from the
operations officer, showing who was to be put in which room and which bunk.
(Myshin attached great importance to centrally planned allocation of places in
prison living quarters, where his informants were evenly distributed. He knew
that the frankest conversations are held not amid the bustle of the working day
but at bedtime, and that the most sullen anti-Soviet utterances were made in the
early morning, so that it is particularly useful to have an observer in a nearby
bed.)
Nadelashin next dutifully looked once into every room where Christmas was
being celebrated, ostensibly to estimate the wattage of the lightbulbs hanging
there. He also sent a guard to take just one look. And he made a list of the
celebrants.
Then Major Myshin summoned him again, and Nadelashin delivered the list.
Myshin was particularly interested to see that Rubin had been with the
Germans and recorded this in a file.
By then it was time to change sentries and settle an argument between two
guards as to which of them had been on duty longer last time and who owed
whom how many hours.
Next it was time to sound lights-out, argue with Pryanchikov about hot water,
make the rounds again, extinguish the white light, and switch on the blue. . . .
After which he was sent for yet again by Major Myshin, who just wouldn’t go
home. (His wife was unwell, and he didn’t want to listen to her grumblings all
evening.)
Major Myshin, in his easy chair, kept Nadelashin standing while he
interrogated him. Who, from what he had observed, were Rubin’s usual leisure
companions? Had he at any time spoken defiantly about the prison
administration? Had he voiced demands in the name of the masses?
Nadelashin was unique among the MGB officers who supervised teams of
guards. He had been severely reprimanded time and time again. His native
kindheartedness had long been a handicap to him in his career. If he had not
made an effort to conform, he would have been dismissed long ago and
perhaps even jailed. It was not in his nature to be rude to prisoners. He smiled
at them with genuine goodwill. Whenever he could show some slight
indulgence, he did so. In return the prisoners liked him, did not complain about
him, did not defy him, and talked uninhibitedly in his presence. He had sharp
eyes and good ears, and he was quite literate, so he wrote it all down in a
special little notebook to assist his memory and reported some of it to his
superiors, thus compensating for various derelictions of duty.
So it was now. He took out his notebook and informed the major that on
December 17 a gang of prisoners had been walking along the lower hallway on
the way back from their after-dinner exercise, and he, Nadelashin, had been
walking right behind them. The prisoners were bellyaching about tomorrow
being Sunday and about not being able to get a day off, and Rubin had said to
them, “Will you fellows never learn that it’s hopeless expecting sympathy from
those reptiles?” (the prison staff).
“He actually said that, ‘those reptiles’?”
“His very words,” the moonlike Nadelashin confirmed with a tolerant smile.
Myshin opened the file again, made a note, and ordered Nadelashin to put in
a separate report.
Major Myshin hated Rubin and was accumulating incriminating evidence
against him. When he started work at Marfino and learned that Rubin, an exCommunist,
went around boasting that, jail or no jail, he was still a Communist
at heart, Myshin had called him in for a talk about life in general and about
their future collaboration in particular. Myshin had confronted Rubin word for
word, with the arguments recommended at Ministry of State Security briefing
sessions:
—if you are a true Soviet citizen, you will help us;
—if you do not help us, you are not a true Soviet citizen;
—if you are not a true Soviet citizen, you are anti-Soviet and deserve a
stiffer sentence.
But Rubin had asked, “Should I write my denunciations in ink or in pencil?”
“Ink is better,” Myshin advised him. “Only, you see, I’ve already proved my
devotion to the Soviet regime with my blood, and I don’t need to prove it in
ink.”
So Rubin had shown the major from the start the full extent of his
disingenuousness and duplicity.
The major had made one more attempt. This time Rubin made the glaringly
false excuse that, since he had been jailed, he was obviously considered
politically unreliable, and, that being so, he could not collaborate with the
operations officer.
Since then, Myshin had nursed his resentment and collected all the evidence
he could for use against Rubin.
Before the major had finished with the junior lieutenant, a sedan arrived from
the Ministry of State Security to pick up Bobynin. Taking advantage of this
happy coincidence, Myshin dashed outside without his overcoat and hung
around the car, inviting the accompanying officer to come in for a warm-up,
advertising the fact that he, Myshin, stayed behind working at night, badgering
Nadelashin, anxiously asking Bobynin whether he was warm enough (he was
demonstratively wearing a padded jacket brought along from the camp, not the
heavy overcoat issued at Marfino).
Immediately after Bobynin’s departure, Pryanchikov was sent for, and the
major could not possibly think of going home. To relieve the suspense while he
waited to discover who else would be sent for and when they would all return,
the major went to see how some of the guards were spending their rest period.
They were playing a desperate game of dominoes. Myshin, who was
responsible for their political education, set about examining them on the
history of the Party. Although they were officially on duty, they answered the
major’s questions with understandable reluctance. Their performance was
lamentable. Not only were these warriors unable to name a single work by
Lenin or Stalin, they even said that Plekhanov was a tsarist minister and had
shot down the Petersburg workers on January 9, 1905. Myshin told Nadelashin
off for letting his shift get out of hand.
Bobynin and Pryanchikov returned together and went to bed without a word
to the major. Disappointed and more worried than ever, he left in the same car,
since the buses had stopped running.
The off-duty guards told the major what they thought of him—now that he had
gone—and started getting ready for bed. Nadelashin, too, yearned for a catnap,
but it was not to be; there was a telephone call from the guardhouse of the
convoy troops who manned the towers around the Marfino complex. The guard
commander excitedly reported that he had been called up by the sentry in the
tower at the southwest corner. In the thickening fog he had clearly seen
someone lurking at the corner of the woodshed, then trying to crawl toward the
wire between the prison yard and the outer security zone. The sentry’s
challenge had frightened the man, and he had run right back into the yard. The
guard commander announced that he was about to call his own regimental HQ
and write a report on this untoward occurrence, and he asked the duty officer at
the special prison to organize a sweep of the yard in the meantime.
Although Nadelashin was firmly of the opinion that the sentry had been
having hallucinations and that the prisoners were safely locked in behind new
iron doors set in stout ancient walls four bricks thick, the mere fact that the
guard commander was writing a report called for energetic action and a
corresponding report from him, too. He therefore sounded the alarm and led
the “resting” shift around the fogbound yard with “Bat” lanterns. After this he
himself went around all the cells again. He considerately refrained from
switching the white light on (to avoid unnecessary complaints) but could not
see very well by the blue light and bumped his knee painfully on the corner of
someone’s bed before illuminating the heads of the sleeping prisoners with his
flashlight and counting all 281 of them.
He then went into the office and, in the neat, round handwriting that mirrored
his limpid soul, wrote a report on the night’s events, addressing it to the
commandant of the special prison, Lieutenant Colonel Klimentiev.
By then it was morning, time to check the kitchen and sound reveille.
That was how Junior Lieutenant Nadelashin had spent the night. He had
every right to tell Nerzhin that he did not eat the bread of idleness.
Nadelashin was well over thirty, although the freshness of his whiskerless
face made him look younger.
His father and grandfather had been tailors, not tailors deluxe but good
craftsmen, serving people of modest means, not above taking orders for turning
or shortening or for emergency repairs. The boy was meant to follow in their
footsteps. He himself took a liking to this pleasant and undemanding work as a
child and trained himself for it by watching and helping. But the NEP
*
came to
an end, and his father was presented with a twelve-month tax demand. He paid
up. Two days later he was confronted with another twelve-month demand.
Utterly shameless, they came again two days after this with a third demand, for
three times the previous amount. Nadelashin’s father tore up his license, took
down his sign, and joined a cooperative workshop. Nadelashin himself was
called up soon afterward, found himself serving with the Ministry of the
Interior’s forces, and was later transferred to the prison guard service.
During the fourteen years of his service, four waves of prison guards had
passed him by. Some were already captains. He had been grudgingly awarded
his first star just a month ago.
Nadelashin understood much more than he let on. He realized that these
prisoners, deprived of basic human rights, were in fact often his superiors. But
he also, as we all do, assumed that others were not essentially different in
character from himself and could not imagine that they were such murderous
villains as they were, each and every one, made out to be in politics classes.
He remembered, even more precisely than the definition of work in his nightschool
physics textbook, every bend in the five prison corridors of the Big
Lubyanka and the interior of each of its 110 cells. In accordance with the
Lubyanka’s regulations, guards were moved from one part of the corridor to
another every two hours. This was a precaution against their becoming too
intimate with prisoners, thereby being won over or bribed by them. (Guards
were in any case better paid than teachers or engineers.)
A guard had to peep through every spy hole at least once every three minutes.
Nadelashin, with his exceptional memory for faces, thought that he could
remember every single prisoner on his floor of the prison between 1935 and
1947 (when he had been transferred to Marfino), whether they were famous
leaders like Bukharin or ordinary front-line officers like Nerzhin. He thought
that even now he would recognize any one of them in the street, whatever he
was wearing. In fact, they never reappeared in the street, and it was only here,
in Marfino, that he had met again old acquaintances whom he had once had
under lock and key, without, of course, letting them know that he recognized
them. He remembered seeing this or that prisoner in a cataleptic trance from
enforced sleeplessness in blindingly lit boxes, one meter square; slicing a fourhundred-gram
ration of damp bread with a thread; absorbed in one of the
beautiful old books with which the prison library was abundantly stocked;
filing out to the latrine; holding his hands behind his back when called in for
interrogation; suddenly cheerful and talkative in the last half hour before
bedtime; lying under the bright light on a winter night, hands outside the
blankets, swathed in towels to keep warm (there was a standing order that
anybody who hid his hands under his blanket must be woken up and made to
take them out).
Nadelashin liked best of all listening to arguments and conversations
between these white-bearded academicians, priests, old Bolsheviks, generals,
and funny foreigners. Eavesdropping was part of his duty, but he listened for
his own edification, too. Nadelashin would have liked—if his official duties
had ever allowed it—to listen to somebody’s story from beginning to end
without interruption, to hear how he had lived before and what he had been
jailed for. He was astonished that these people, in the dreadful months when
their lives had broken down and their future was in the balance, found the
courage to talk not about their sufferings but about everything under the sun:
Italian artists, the behavior of bees, wolf hunting, or the way some fellow—
called Kar-bu-zi-ye, was it—built houses, though he wasn’t building for them.
One day Nadelashin happened to overhear a conversation that particularly
interested him. He was sitting in the back of a police truck, escorting the two
prisoners locked in a cage inside it. They were being transferred from the Big
Lubyanka to the Sukhanovo—the “country house”—a sinister, dead-end prison
outside Moscow, from which many left for the grave or the madhouse.
Nadelashin had not worked in the place himself, but he had heard that even the
meals there were a form of refined torture; they did not prepare coarse and
heavy food for the prisoners, like everywhere else, but brought delicate,
savory dishes from the rest home nearby. The torture consisted in the size of
the portions; they would bring a prisoner a small bowl half full of soup, one
eighth of a rissole, two slivers of a roast potato. You weren’t fed, merely
reminded of what you had forfeited. Such “meals” were much more distressing
than a bowl of watery gruel, and they helped to drive people mad.
Normally the two prisoners in the truck would have been separated, but on
this occasion they were being moved together. Nadelashin could not hear the
beginning of their conversation, but then something went wrong with the
engine. The driver went off somewhere, the officer was sitting in the cab, and
Nadelashin heard the prisoners’ quiet conversation through the grating in the
cage door. They were cursing the government and the tsar, but not the present
government and not Stalin. They were vilifying the emperor Peter I. What harm
could he have done them? For whatever reason, they were tearing him to
pieces. One of them cursed Peter, among other things, for disfiguring or
suppressing Russian national dress, and so making Russians indistinguishable
from other peoples. This prisoner gave a detailed inventory of traditional
garments, described their appearance, and said on what occasions they were
worn. He asserted that it was not too late even now to resurrect some parts of
these costumes, combining them in a comfortable and dignified fashion with
modern dress, instead of blindly copying Paris. The other prisoner replied
jokingly—they could still make jokes!—that you would need two men, a tailor
of genius clever enough to put it all together and a fashionable tenor to wear
these clothes and be photographed in them, after which all Russia would
quickly adopt them.
This conversation particularly interested Nadelashin; tailoring had remained
his private passion. After so many duty periods in the halls of the main
political prison, where madness was at white heat, the rustle of cloth, the ease
with which it let itself be folded, the innocuous character of the work, were
soothing.
He clothed all his children, made dresses for his wife and suits for himself.
But he kept it secret.
It would be thought demeaning in a member of the armed forces.
* NEP: Instituted by Lenin in 1921, the so-called New Economic Policy
reintroduced limited private enterprise into the Soviet economy. It was
intended as a temporary measure to revitalize the Soviet system after the
excesses of “war Communism.”