Chapter-61-The-Uncle-at-Tver

INNOKENTYHAD NOTED with surprise that his uncle’s address included no
apartment number. It proved unnecessary. He did not take long looking for it: a
sagging, one-story wooden house among others like it on a paved side street
without trees or fences. Innokenty was not sure at first whether to knock at the
lopsided front door with patterned panels or the wicket in the yard gate. He
tried both, but no one opened up or called out. He shook the wicket. It was
nailed shut. He pushed the front door. It wouldn’t budge.
The poverty-stricken look of the house made him surer than ever that he
should not have come.
He looked up and down the lane for someone to ask, but the whole place was
deserted under the noonday sun. Until an old man came round the corner
carrying two full buckets. He carried them with stiff caution, caught his foot
once, but did not stop. One of his shoulders was slightly higher than the other.
He was heading that way, diagonally, following his own shadow, and he was
aware of the visitor, although his eyes never left the ground. Innokenty took one
step away from his suitcase, then another.
“Uncle Avenir?”
Bending his knees more than his back, Uncle Avenir set the buckets down
neatly, without spilling a drop. He straightened up, removed the dirty yellow
pancake of a cap from his close-cropped gray head, and wiped away the sweat
with the same clenched hand. He struggled to say something but opened his
arms instead, and before he knew it, Innokenty was bending down (his uncle
was half a head shorter) and pricking his smooth cheek on his uncle’s unshaved
face. His hand had somehow found the jutting shoulder blade that made his
uncle’s shoulder crooked.
Uncle Avenir raised both hands to Innokenty’s shoulders and held him at
arm’s length for inspection.
He meant to say something suitably solemn, but what came out was “You’re
rather thin.”
“So are you.”
His uncle wasn’t just thin, he obviously had all sorts of ailments and
disabilities, but as far as Innokenty could see in the bright sunlight, Uncle
Avenir’s were not the dim and apathetic eyes of an old man.
He grinned lopsidedly.
“Me! I don’t go in for banquets. What are you here for?”
Innokenty was glad that he had taken Klara’s advice and bought sausage and
smoked fish, which could probably not be had in Tver for love or money. He
sighed.
“I’ve got worries, Uncle.”
His uncle looked him over with lively eyes that had kept their power.
“Maybe you have. Maybe you only think so.”
“Do you have to go far for your water?”
“One block, two blocks, and another half block. But they aren’t very big
blocks.”
Innokenty bent down and lifted the buckets to carry them inside. They were
heavier than he had expected. They might have had iron bottoms.
His uncle walked behind, laughing.
“What a worker you’d make! I can see you aren’t used to it.”
He took the lead and unlocked the door. In the narrow passageway he put his
hands on the yoke and steadied the buckets onto a bench. The natty blue
suitcase was put down on a crooked floor of wobbly, ill-fitting boards. The
door was bolted immediately, as though Uncle expected intruders.
The hallway had a low ceiling, a small window looking onto the yard gate,
two closet doors, and two for people. Innokenty began to feel ill at ease. He
had never before let himself in for anything like this. He regretted coming and
tried to think of an excuse to rush off toward evening, not to stay the night.
The doors to the rooms and between rooms were all crooked; some were
lined with felt; others were double doors with old-fashioned ornamentation.
You had to bend your head at every doorway and take care not to bump it on
the ceiling lamps. The air in the three small rooms was stale because the
second window frames were a permanent fixture, wedged in with cotton and
colored paper. Only the ventilation panes opened, but strips of shredded
newspaper hung fluttering before them to scare the flies away.
The dispiriting poverty of it all—this squat and crooked shack, ill-lit and
airless, with not a stick of furniture standing squarely on the floor—was
something Innokenty had read about but never seen for himself. Not all of the
walls were even whitewashed; in places the timbers were daubed with dark
paint. Dusty, yellowing newspapers hung everywhere, serving as “wall
carpets.” Several thicknesses of newspaper hid the glass doors of cabinets, the
niche in the sideboard, the tops of windows, and the wall behind the stove.
Innokenty felt trapped. He must get away before the day was over!
His uncle, though, seemed proud rather than ashamed as he showed Innokenty
various desirable features: the homely earth closet for summer and winter use,
the washstand, the arrangements for catching rainwater. Needless to say,
vegetable peelings did not go to waste.
Innokenty could imagine what sort of wife would shortly appear! And what
the bed linen would be like!
But still, this was his mother’s brother; he knew about her life from
childhood on and was in fact Innokenty’s only blood relation. Bolt now, and he
would never learn all he needed to know, never even be able to think his own
problem through.
And anyway his uncle’s directness and his one-sided grin pleased Innokenty.
In those first few words he sensed that there was more to the man than had
appeared in the two short letters.
In times of general mistrust and treachery, kinship gives at least an initial
hope that the man you are dealing with has not been thrown in your way for
some underhanded purpose, that his route to you was a natural one. You can
tell a kinsman, even a dim one, things that you could not discuss with the most
luminous of sages.
Uncle Avenir was not just thin; he had withered away till there was only the
indispensable minimum left on his bones. But such people are long-lived.
“How old are you, exactly, Uncle?”
(Innokenty hadn’t even a rough idea.)
His uncle looked at him hard and answered enigmatically: “I’m his
contemporary.”
“Whose?”
“The Man himself.”
His gaze was unwavering.
Innokenty smiled readily. This was familiar ground. Even in the years when
he had cheered in unison with everybody else, the Man’s vulgar manner, his
crass speeches, his glaring stupidity had left a bad taste.
When his remark was met neither with polite incomprehension nor with lofty
disapproval, Uncle Avenir brightened and risked a little joke.
“Ahem! You must admit that it would be presumptuous of me to die first. If I
can squeeze into second place in the line, I will.”
They both laughed. The first spark had leaped between them. After that it
was easier.
Uncle Avenir’s clothes were dreadful. The shirt under his jacket didn’t bear
looking at. The ragged collar, lapels, and cuffs of his jacket had been mended
and were fraying again. His trousers had been patched so often that there was
little of the original material to be seen, and the patches were of different
colors, some plain gray, some checkered, some striped. His shoes had been
repaired and restitched so often that they looked like a convict’s clogs. Uncle
Avenir, however, explained that these were his working clothes and that he
never went farther than the pump and the bread shop in them. He was,
however, in no hurry to change.
He did not waste much time on the rooms but took Innokenty to see the yard.
The day was now very warm, cloudless, and windless.
The yard was only thirty meters by ten, but it belonged entirely to Uncle
Avenir. He was separated from his neighbors by ramshackle sheds and gappy
fences, but they served their purpose. There was room for a paved area and a
paved path, a tank for rainwater, a feeding trough, a woodpile, a summer stove,
and there was still room left for a garden. Uncle Avenir took him around and
introduced him to every tree and plant; just from their leaves, without flowers
or fruit, Innokenty would have recognized none of them. There was a Chinese
rosebush, a jasmine, a lilac, a flower bed with nasturtiums, poppies, and
asters. There were two luxuriantly leafy black-currant bushes; Uncle Avenir
complained that although they had blossomed abundantly, they had produced
hardly any berries because there had been a sudden frost at pollination time.
There was one cherry tree and one apple tree, with props to bear the weight of
the latter’s branches. The weeds had all been pulled up, and only the plants
that should have been there were there.
There must have been a lot more crawling on the knees and work with
fingers than Innokenty could appreciate. But he understood sufficiently to say,
“It must be very hard for you, Uncle! How do you manage all that bending and
digging and carrying?”
“I’m not afraid of that, Innokenty. Carrying water, chopping wood, digging,
as long as you don’t overdo it—that’s the normal way for a person to live.
You’re more likely to suffocate in one of those five-story egg boxes, sharing a
flat with the leading class.”
“Which class is that?”
“The proletariat.”
The old man eyed him speculatively again. “The domino bashers, the ones
who keep the radio on from early morning till late at night. They only leave
themselves five hours and fifty minutes to sleep. They break bottles where
passersby can tread on the glass; they dump their trash out there in the middle
of the street. Have you ever wondered why they’re supposed to be the leading
class?”
Innokenty shook his head. “Hmm . . . well . . . that’s something I’ve never
understood.”
“They’re the most barbarous class!” his uncle said angrily. “Peasants
commune with the soil, with nature, and learn their morality from it.
Intellectuals are engaged in the noble work of thinking. But these people spend
all their lives within dead walls making dead things with dead machines. How
can they ever learn anything?”
They walked on and sat down for a while, looking around them.
“No, I don’t find it hard work. Everything I do here I do with a clear
conscience. When I empty the slops, it’s with a clear conscience. I scrape the
floor with a clear conscience. If I rake out the ashes and light the stove, there’s
nothing bad in that. But if you’ve got a position to hold down, you can’t live
like that. You have to truckle . . . and you have to be dishonest. I beat a retreat
every time. I couldn’t even stand being a librarian, let alone a teacher.”
“What’s so hard about a librarian’s job?”
“Just go and try it. You have to trash good books and praise bad ones. You
have to mislead undeveloped minds. What job would you say can be done with
a clear conscience?”
Innokenty knew too little about other jobs to say anything. The only job he
had held was against his conscience,
The house, it seemed, was Raisa Timofeevna’s and had been for a long time.
She was the one who had a job, as a hospital nurse. She had grown-up children
who had set up house elsewhere. She had taken Uncle Avenir under her wing
when he was physically and mentally in a poor way and destitute. She had set
him on his feet again, and he was eternally grateful to her. She worked double
shifts. Uncle Avenir didn’t mind a bit preparing their meals, washing dishes,
and doing all the housework.
Behind the bushes up against the fence there was, as there should be in every
real garden, a secluded bench, its legs set in the ground. Uncle and nephew sat
down.
No, it was no hardship, Uncle Avenir insisted, developing his theme with the
stubbornness of old age. His was the natural way to live, not on asphalt but on
a piece of land that would let a spade in. Never mind that the whole plot was
only three spades long and two spades wide. He had been living that way for
ten years and was glad of it; he could ask for no better lot. However rickety
and full of gaps, those fences were his protection, his fortifications. Only bad
things came from outside—the din of radios, tax demands, orders to carry out
community service. Every unexpected knock at the door meant something
unpleasant. So far nobody had come bearing good news.
No, it was no hardship. There were much greater hardships.
Such as?
The old man in the patched clothes and the flat cap was less and less
mistrustful, but he gave Innokenty a cautious sideways look. There were things
you shouldn’t venture into with strangers after two years, let alone two hours.
Still, this boy seemed to have some idea, he was kin, so . . . keep it up, boy,
keep it up!
“The hardest thing of the lot,” Uncle Avenir said, burning with indignation,
“is having to hang the flag out on public holidays. Householders have to hang
out flags.” (Say it now or never!) “Compulsory show of loyalty to a
government that perhaps you don’t respect.”
Look out! Is he madman or sage, this emaciated and bedraggled creature
blurting out his thoughts to you? Sleek from good living, draped in an academic
gown and speaking unhurriedly, he would by general consent be a sage.
Innokenty did not recoil, did not instantly protest. But his uncle took refuge
behind a reliably broad back.
“Have you read anything by Herzen? Read him properly?”
“Yes . . . I think so.”
His uncle bore down on him, thrust the crooked shoulder at him (he had
acquired a spinal curvature poring over books in his youth).
“Herzen asks what are the limits of patriotism. Must love for your native
land extend to any and every government it may have? Must you go on abetting
it in destroying its own people?”
Simple and cogent. Innokenty repeated it, to see if he had got it right.
“Must love for your native land extend to. . . ?”
But by now they were at the opposite fence, and Uncle Avenir’s eyes scanned
the cracks at which neighbors might be eavesdropping.
Their conversation had gotten off to a good start. Back inside the house,
Innokenty no longer felt that he was suffocating and no longer thought of
leaving. Strangely, he did not notice the hours go by; it was all so interesting.
Uncle Avenir bustled about to the kitchen and back. They reminisced about
Innokenty’s mother. They looked at old snapshots, and Uncle made him a
present of some of them. He had, however, been a lot older than his sister, and
they had not been children together.
Raisa Timofeevna came home from work. She was a severe woman of fifty,
and she returned Innokenty’s greeting grudgingly. He shared his uncle’s
embarrassment and also felt a strange fear that she would ruin everything for
them. They sat down at a table covered with dark oilcloth to what might have
been either dinner or supper. It was difficult to see what sort of meal they
would have had if Innokenty had not brought half a suitcase full of food with
him and sent his uncle out to get vodka. The hosts did pick a few of their
tomatoes. And supplied the potatoes.
Still, their kinsman’s generosity and the fine fare put a sparkle in Raisa
Timofeevna’s eyes and relieved Innokenty of any feeling of guilt—for all the
times when he had not come in the past and for coming now. They drank a shot,
then another, and Raisa Timofeevna began airing her grievances against the
good-for-nothing Avenir: He’d made a mess of his life; he couldn’t get on with
people in any place of work because of his awkward character, but that
wouldn’t matter so much if he would just stay quietly at home! But oh no, he
couldn’t resist spending his last few kopecks on newspapers. He even bought
New Times now and then; that was expensive, and he didn’t buy them to enjoy
them; in fact, he got furious with them, and sat up night after night dashing off
answers to articles, then never sent them in but rather burned them after a day
or two because even keeping them in the house was unthinkable. This pointless
scribbling occupied half of his time. He also went to hear visiting lecturers
talk about the international situation, and she was always terrified that he
would get up and ask a question and never come home. He didn’t ask
questions, though, and always got home safe and sound.
Uncle Avenir made little effort to defend himself. He laughed apologetically,
but his lopsided grin gave no hope of amendment! And anyway, Raisa
Timofeevna’s complaints were halfhearted; she seemed to have given up hope
long ago. And she obviously didn’t begrudge him those “last few kopecks.”
Their dark house with its unpainted walls and its bare rooms became cozier
as soon as they closed the shutters. That soothing seclusion from the world
outside is something our age has forgotten. Each shutter was held to by a strip
of iron, from which a flange protruded through an opening into the house,
where a peg was inserted in its eyehole. They didn’t need this to keep thieves
out; they could have left the windows wide open; there was no loot to be had.
But once the bolts were shot, the soul could relax its vigilance. They could not
have managed any other way; the footpath ran under their windows, and
passersby seemed to be barging into the room with their heavy tread, their loud
voices, and their foul language.
Raisa Timofeevna went to bed early, and Uncle Avenir, moving and speaking
quietly in the middle room (his hearing too was unimpaired), revealed yet
another of his secrets: the swatches of yellowed newspaper hung up out of the
sun and dust were just a noncriminal way of preserving the most interesting
news from times past. (“Why are you keeping that particular newspaper,
Citizen?” “I’m not keeping it; it just happens to be there.”) He couldn’t mark
them, but he knew by heart what he could find in any one of them. They were
hung up in such a way that the interesting bits could be got at without undoing a
whole bundle every time.
They stood side by side on two chairs, Uncle Avenir wearing his glasses,
and read what Stalin had to say in 1939: “I know how the German people
loves its Führer, and I therefore drink to his health!” In a 1924 newspaper over
the window, Stalin was defending “the loyal Leninists Kamenev and Zinoviev”
against the accusation that they had tried to sabotage the October coup.
Innokenty was carried away by the excitement of the chase, and even in the
feeble light of a forty-watt bulb, they would have gone on scrambling about the
walls and rustling paper, trying to decipher the smudged and faded lines; but
his wife’s reproachful cough on the other side of the wall worried Uncle
Avenir, and he said: “Let’s call it a day. You aren’t leaving tomorrow, are you?
We’d better put the light out; it uses a lot of juice. Why, I ask you, do they
charge so much for electricity? However many power stations we build, it
doesn’t get any cheaper.”
They put the light out. But they didn’t feel like sleeping. In the small third
room, a bed had been made up for Innokenty; his uncle perched on the edge of
it, and they went on whispering for an hour or two like enraptured lovers who
need no light for their billing and cooing.
“It was all done by fraud,” Uncle Avenir insisted. In the dark you would
never have taken his firm voice for that of an old man. “Instead of a
government true to its word—‘Peace to the people! Bayonets into the
ground!’—a year later deserter squads were hunting peasants in the woods and
shooting them as a lesson to the rest! The tsar never did that. ‘Workers’ Control
of Production’? Nowhere did it last a single month. The central government got
a stranglehold on everything. If they’d said in 1917 that production norms
would be raised year in and year out, who would ever have followed them?
‘An end to secret diplomacy and secret appointments,’ and in no time they
were stamping everything ‘Secret’ or ‘Top Secret.’ Was there ever a country in
which the people knew less about their government than we do?”
Skipping from decade to decade and subject to subject was somehow easier
in the dark, and Uncle Avenir was soon telling Innokenty that throughout the
war large contingents of NKVD troops were garrisoned in all big provincial
towns and never moved up to the front. Whereas the tsar had put all his guard
regiments through the grinder and was left with no internal troops to put down
Revolution. As for the muddleheaded provisional government, it had no troops
at all at its disposal.
“Another thing, about this last war between the Soviet Union and Germany.
How do you see it?”
Talking to him was so easy! Innokenty unhesitatingly found words that would
never have occurred to him but for this dialogue.
“I see it as a tragic war. We defended our country, and we lost it. It became
the private estate of the Man with the Big Mustache and nothing more.”
“We lost a lot more than the seven million they talk about,” his uncle said.
“Of course we did. And for what? Just to draw the noose tighter around our
necks. It’s the most unfortunate war in Russian history.”
Then he went backward again, to the Second Congress of Soviets. Only three
hundred out of the nine hundred deputies were present, there was no quorum,
and so the congress had no power to confirm the Council of People’s
Commissars.
“I never knew that!”
They had said good night twice, and Uncle Avenir had asked whether he
should leave the door open because it was a bit stuffy; but then for some reason
the atomic bomb surfaced, and he came back to whisper fiercely, “They’ll
never make it themselves!”
“They may. In fact, I’ve heard that the first bomb will be tested very shortly.”
“Nonsense!” Uncle Avenir said confidently. “They’ll announce it, but who
can check? They haven’t got the industrial base for it. It would take them
twenty years.”
He turned to leave the room and came back yet again.
“But if they do succeed in making it, we’re done for, Inok. We will lose all
hope of freedom.”
Innokenty lay on his back, his eyes drinking in the thick darkness.
“Yes, it will be dreadful. . . . They won’t let it lie idle. . . . And without the
bomb they’ll never dare go to war.”
“War is never the way out.” (Uncle Avenir was back again.) “It isn’t the
advancing armies, the fires, and the bombing that make war terrible; it’s
terrible mainly because it gives stupidity legitimate power over intelligence.
Still, that’s the way it is with us even without war. . . . Now, go to sleep.”
Household chores will not stand neglect. All that Uncle Avenir had skimped
on that day awaited him the next morning, in addition to his usual routine.
Before he left for the market, he took down two wads of newspaper, and
Innokenty, knowing by now that it would be impossible to read them in the
evening, hastened to look at them by daylight. The dried-out and dust-laden
pages were unpleasant to the touch and left nasty smudges on the tips of his
fingers. At first he kept washing or wiping the dirt off, but after a while he
stopped noticing it, as he had stopped noticing all the house’s defects—the
uneven floors, the poor light from the windows—and his uncle’s shabbiness.
The earlier the year, the stranger it was to read about. He knew now that he
would not be leaving that day either.
In the evening they all dined together again. Uncle Avenir was lively and
cheerful, reminiscing about his student years, the Philosophy Department, noisy
and jovial student Revolutionary circles in the days when there was no more
interesting place than prison. He had never joined a political party, because all
party programs, as he saw it, did violence to man’s free will, and he did not
acknowledge the prophetic superiority of party leaders to the rest of mankind.
Raisa Timofeevna interrupted his reminiscences from time to time to talk
about her hospital and all the snapping and snarling that was part of her (and
everybody else’s) life.
Once more they closed the shutters and bolted them. Then Uncle Avenir
opened a chest in one of the storerooms and with the aid of an oil lamp (there
was no wiring there) pulled out some warm clothes smelling of mothballs,
some of them just rags. Then he held the lamp high and showed his nephew his
treasure: the smooth, painted bottom of the chest was lined with a copy of
Pravda from the second day of the October Revolution. The banner headline
read: COMRADES! WITH YOUR BLOOD YOU HAVE INSURED THATTHE
CONSTITUENTASSEMBLY, THE RIGHTFUL MASTER OF OUR LAND, WILL BE DULY
CONVENED.
“That was before there had been any elections, of course. They didn’t know
yet how few would vote for them.”
He repacked the chest slowly and neatly.
It was in the Constituent Assembly that the paths of Innokenty’s father and
uncle had crossed. Artem, his father, was one of the leaders of the land-based
sailors who had dispersed the unspeakable Constituent Assembly, while Uncle
Avenir had demonstrated in support of that long-promised and eagerly awaited
body.
The demonstration with which Uncle Avenir had marched had gathered at the
Troitsky Bridge. It was a mild, overcast winter day without wind or snow, and
many of them wore open-necked shirts under their sheepskin coats. There were
many students, high school pupils, and young ladies. Post office workers,
telegraphers, civil servants. And miscellaneous individuals like Uncle Avenir.
There were red flags carried by socialists and Revolutionaries and one or two
green and white Kadet flags. A second demonstration, starting from the
factories over the Neva, was entirely Social Democratic but also carried red
flags.
This story was told last thing at night, and in the dark again, so as not to
annoy Raisa Timofeevna. The house was shut up tight and in uneasy darkness,
as all houses in Russia used to be in the far-off and forgotten time of feuds and
murders, when people listened anxiously to the menacing sound of footsteps in
the street and, if there was a moon, peered out through cracks in the shutters.
There was no moon that night, and the streetlight was some way from the
house. There were no gaps in these shutters, but a faint light struggling through
the unshuttered window in the hallway and the wide-open door of their room
occasionally allowed Innokenty to distinguish the movements rather than the
contours of his uncle’s head against the surrounding blackness. Unsupported by
the shine of his eyes and the tormented lines of his face, his voice asserted
itself all the more youthfully and assuredly.
“We marched grimly, in silence, not singing. We understood the importance
of the occasion, but perhaps we didn’t fully understand. This was the one and
only day of a free Russian parliament, something that had not existed in the
preceding five hundred years and would not exist in the one hundred years
ahead. Who wanted this parliament anyway? How many of us had gathered,
from all over Russia? Five thousand. . . . They opened fire on us from
gateways, from rooftops, and then from the sidewalks, and they weren’t
shooting in the air but aiming point-blank at the demonstrators, chest high. Two
or three fell out with each volley; the rest marched on. . . . None of us returned
their fire; we didn’t have a single revolver between us. They wouldn’t let us
get as far as the Tauride Palace. It was densely surrounded by sailors and
Latvian sharpshooters. The Latvians decided our fate, little knowing what was
in store for Latvia. On the Liteiny the Red Guards barred the way: ‘Break it up!
Get on the pavement!’ They opened fire in short bursts. Red Guards tore one of
the red flags out of our hands; I could tell you a thing or two about those Red
Guards. . . . They broke the pole and trampled the flag underfoot. . . . Some of
the demonstrators scattered; some ran back the way they’d come. The Red
Guards fired on them from behind and killed some. They found it so easy, those
Red Guards, shooting peaceful demonstrators in the back. Just imagine it, and
remember that the Civil War hadn’t begun yet! But their code of behavior was
already worked out.”
Uncle Avenir took a deep breath. “Nowadays January ninth is a red-letter
day in the calendar, but January fifth you can’t even mention in a whisper.”
He heaved another sigh.
“And then there was the low trick they played pretending that they opened
fire on us because the demonstration was organized by supporters of Kaledin.
What did we have to do with Kaledin? I ask you. Some people can’t
understand the idea of opposition within their own ranks. Who are these
people who walk among us, speak our language, and demand what they call
freedom? We must at all costs disown them, connect them with the enemy
outside, and then we can comfortably open fire on them.”
The silence in the darkness was more tense and meaningful than ever.
The old wire mattress creaked as Innokenty pulled himself up against the
bedboard.
“What happened inside the Tauride?”
“On the eve of the Epiphany?” Uncle Avenir took a deep breath. “The mob,
the okhlos,
*
was in full cry. . . . Deafening three-fingered whistles. . . . Filthy
language drowned the speeches. They banged their rifle butts on the floor, with
or without reason. They were on guard duty, you see. Guarding whom, against
what? So-called soldiers and sailors, half of them drunk, spewing in the
refreshment room, snoring on sofas, spitting out the husks of their sunflower
seeds all over the foyer. Put yourself in the place of a deputy, an educated man,
and tell me what you would do with that filthy rabble. A tap on the shoulder or
a quiet telling-off would be blatant counterrevolution! An insult to sacred mob
rule! Besides, they were wearing crossed machine-gun belts over their tunics.
They had grenades and Mausers at their belts. In the hall where the Constituent
Assembly met, they sat with rifles even among the general public, stood in the
passageways rifles in hand, leveled them at speakers as though they were
targets on the range. Somebody would be talking about some sort of
democratic peace and the nationalization of the land, and twenty muzzles
would be trained on him, foresights and backsights in alignment. If they killed
him, it wouldn’t even cost them an apology! Bring on the next one! Sitting there
with their rifles aimed at the speaker’s mouth! That’s all you need to know
about them. That’s what they were like when they took over Russia, that’s what
they always had been, and that’s what they’ll be as long as they live. They may
change in some respects but not in essentials. Then there was Sverdlov,
snatching the bell from the senior deputy’s hand, shoving him aside, refusing to
let him declare the assembly open. Lewin sat in the government box laughing
up his sleeve, reveling in it all. As for People’s Commissar Karelin, one of the
Left SRs, he was roaring his head off! He didn’t have the wit to realize what he
was letting himself in for! In six months’ time his own gang would be snuffed
out! You know the rest . . . you’ve seen it at the cinema. The cloth-headed
commissar with the cudgel, Drubber Dubenko, sent his boys to declare the
superfluous assembly closed. The dry-land sailors with their cartridge belts
and pistols rose to catch the chairman’s eye. . . .”
“Including my father?”
“Yes, including your father. The great Civil War hero. Almost at the very
time when your mother . . . gave in to him. They loved smacking their lips over
delicately nurtured young ladies from good homes. That was the most
mouthwatering prize the Revolution had to offer them.”
Innokenty’s brow, ears, cheeks, and neck were burning. He was on fire, as
though he himself had taken part in some vile act.
His uncle pressed a hand on his knee, leaned closer and asked, “Have you
never felt the truth of the saying that the sins of the parents are visited on the
children? And that you must cleanse yourself of them?”
* Okhlos: Greek word for mob.