Chapter-64-Entered-Cities-First

IN THE BIG ROOM they were dancing to a record player, one of the new,
console type. The Makarygins had a cabinet full of records. There were the
speeches of their Father and Friend, mumbling and droning with his Georgian
accent. (No home could be called well supplied without them, though normal
people, the Makarygins included, never listened to them.) There were songs
about “Our Own, Our Beloved Leader” and songs in which airplanes “came
first,” while girls took second place (though listening to them here would have
been as improper as speaking seriously of biblical miracles in a preRevolutionary
drawing room). The records in fashion now were imported but
not to be found in the shops and never broadcast by Soviet radio. They even
included songs sung by the émigré Leshchenko.
The furniture took up too much room for all the couples to dance at once, so
they took turns. The young people present included girls who had been Klara’s
classmates; a man from their class whose job now was jamming foreign
broadcasts; the girl, a relative of the prosecutor, who was responsible for
Shchagov’s presence; a nephew of the prosecutor’s wife, a lieutenant in the
Internal Security Troops whom everybody called a “frontier guard” because of
his green piping (his company was in fact attached to the Belorussian Station in
Moscow to inspect passengers’ documents on trains and carry out arrests that
proved necessary en route). One young man, a statesmanlike figure with
smooth, already thinning hair, stood out from all the rest; he already had the
Order of Lenin but wore just the ribbon, without the medal itself, carelessly (or
carefully?) pinned slantwise.
This young man was twenty-four or so, but his comportment—the restrained
movements of his hands, the gravely pursed lips—was intended to make him
look at least thirty. He was one of the highly valued consultants employed by
the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, and his main job was drafting speeches
to be delivered by deputies at future sessions. The young man found this work
extremely boring, but his prospects were of the brightest. Getting him to attend
her party was in itself a triumph for Alevtina Nikanorovna, and marrying him
to Klara was her wildest dream.
To the young man himself, the only interesting thing about the party was the
presence of Galakhov and his wife. He had danced three times with Dinera. In
her long black dress of imported silk she seemed to be sheathed in shiny black
leather, with only her smooth, white forearms showing. Flattered by the
responsiveness of such a famous woman, the young man grew bolder and tried
to detain her after they had danced.
She, however, had spotted Saunkin-Golovanov, who did not dance and was
at ease nowhere outside his editorial office, sitting in the corner of a sofa. She
made straight for this square head mounted on a square body. The young
consultant glided after her.
“E-rik!” she cried. “Why didn’t I see you at the premiere of 1919?”
Golovanov brightened.
“Went last night,” he said and moved up to make more room on the sofa,
although he was at the very end already.
Dinera sat. The consultant sat down beside her.
If Dinera felt like an argument, it was hopeless trying to avoid it. Indeed,
you’d be lucky if she let you get a word in edgewise. She was the subject of an
epigram of sorts current in Moscow literary circles: “Oh how I enjoy my silent
hours with you—I have to, for you never let me speak.” With no literary
position and no Party office to inhibit her, Dinera boldly (but never
overstepping the mark) attacked playwrights, scriptwriters, and producers, not
sparing even her own husband. Her daring judgments, together with the daring
way she dressed and her daring past, which everybody knew about, made her
very attractive and agreeably enlivened the vapid judgments of timid literary
officeholders. She attacked literary critics in general and the articles of Ernst
Golovanov in particular. Golovanov showed forbearance and tirelessly alerted
Dinera to her anarchistic errors and petit bourgeois backslidings. He was
happy to keep up this humorous pretense of friendly enmity; his literary future
depended on Galakhov.
“Do you remember,” said Dinera, striking a dreamy pose for which the hard
back of the sofa proved too uncomfortable—“do you remember in another of
Vishnevsky’s plays, An Optimistic Tragedy, that chorus of two sailors? One
says, ‘Isn’t there too much blood in this tragedy,’ and the other says, ‘No more
than in Shakespeare.’ Now that’s what I call clever! So you go to this new
Vishnevsky play all agog. And what do you get? It’s realistic enough, of
course, and the portrayal of the Leader is impressive, but, but . . . what else
can you say?”
“What more do you want?” the consultant protested. “I don’t remember ever
seeing such a moving representation of Iosif Vissarionovich. Many people in
the audience shed tears.”
“I had tears in my eyes, too,” Dinera retorted. “That’s not what I’m talking
about.” She turned to Golovanov again. “Hardly anybody in the play has a
name. The dramatis personae are all faceless—three Party secretaries, seven
senior officers, four commissars. It’s like the minutes of a meeting. And yet
again, brief glimpses of the ‘little brothers,’ those sailors forever on the move
from Belotserkovsky to Lavrenev, from Lavrenev to Vishnevsky, from
Vishnevsky to Sobolev”—Dinera emphasized each name with a blink and a
toss of the head—“you know from the start which are the goodies and which
are the baddies, and how it will all end. . . .”
“Well, what’s wrong with that?” Golovanov asked in amazement. He livened
up when he was talking shop. He looked like a hound following a good scent.
“Why do you always want the unreal but superficially entertaining? Is life
really like that? In real life did our fathers ever doubt how the Civil War
would end? Did we ourselves ever doubt how the Fatherland War would end,
even when the enemy was on the outskirts of Moscow?”
“And is a playwright ever in doubt how his play will be received? Explain
to me, Erik, why first nights in Moscow are never a flop? Why don’t
playwrights live in dread of a first-night flop? Honestly, I won’t be able to stop
myself one of these days; I will put my fingers in my mouth and give such a
whistle!”
She mimed it prettily, though it was obvious that no whistle would result.
“Certainly I’ll explain!” Golovanov said, unperturbed. “Plays in our country
do not and cannot fail because playwright and public are in harmony both on
the artistic and ideological level.”
This was too boring. The consultant straightened his yellow-and-blue tie
once, straightened it again, and rose to leave them. One of Klara’s classmates,
a thin, amiable girl, had been quite openly eyeing him all evening, and he
decided to dance with her. A two-step. Then one of the Bashkir maids started
carrying ice cream around. Two chairs had been pushed into the narrow space
in front of the balcony door. The consultant steered his partner toward them, sat
her down, and complimented her on her dancing.
She smiled encouragement and began chattering.
The budding statesman had come across willing females often enough but had
not yet tired of them. This girl, now—all he need do was tell her where and
when to turn up. He eyed her slender neck, her still-unripe breasts, and, taking
advantage of the fact that curtains partly concealed them from the room,
graciously captured the hand that lay on her knee.
She began talking excitedly. “Such luck meeting you here like this, Vitaly
Yevgenievich! Don’t be angry with me for troubling you off duty. Only, I could
never get past Reception at the Supreme Soviet” (Vitaly removed his hand
from hers). “Your Secretariat has had papers from the camp about my father for
six months now, he’s had a stroke, and he’s still there, paralyzed, and I’m
petitioning for a pardon.” (Vitaly leaned back helplessly in his chair and dug
his spoon into the ball of ice cream. The girl had forgotten hers. Her hand
clumsily brushed against the spoon, which somersaulted, left a spot on her
dress, and fell by the balcony door. She let it lie.) “His right side is completely
paralyzed! If he has another stroke, he’ll die, and he hasn’t got long to live
anyway. Why keep him in prison any longer?”
The consultant looked sour.
“It’s . . . it isn’t very tactful of you to approach me here, you know. Our office
number isn’t secret. Call me there, and I’ll make an appointment. What is your
father in for, anyway? Article 58?”
“No, no, certainly not!” the girl exclaimed with relief. “You surely don’t
think I’d dare ask you if he were a political offender? He was sentenced under
the law of August seventh!”
“It comes to the same thing. Remission has also been abolished for people
sentenced under the law of August seventh.”
“But that’s horrible! He’ll die in that camp! Why keep a terminally sick man
in prison?”
The consultant looked her straight in the eye.
“If we take that line, what will be left of the whole legal code?” He grinned.
“After all, he was duly tried and found guilty! Just think! What if he does die in
the camp? People die in camps just like anywhere else. When the time comes,
what does it matter where anybody dies?”
He got up in annoyance and walked away.
The glass door to the balcony looked out on the restlessness of the Kaluga
Road. Headlights, car horns sounding warnings, traffic lights flashing red,
yellow, green under the steadily falling snow.
The girl without tact picked up her spoon, put down her cup, crossed the
room quietly, unnoticed both by Klara and by the hostess, went through the
dining room where tea and cakes were being gotten ready, put her street things
on in the hallway, and made for the door.
Galakhov, Innokenty, and Dotnara stood aside as the despondent girl passed
through the dining room. Golovanov, in high spirits after his talk with Dinera,
greeted his patron with his old playfulness.
“Nikolai Arkadievich! Stop! Confess, now! In the bottommost depths of your
soul you are not a writer, but . . . what?” (This sounded like a repetition of
Innokenty’s question, and Galakhov looked embarrassed). “A soldier, that’s
what!”
Galakhov smiled bravely. “Yes, of course, I’m a soldier!”
He screwed up his eyes like a man staring into the distance. Not even the
most triumphant day in his career as a writer had left such proud memories or,
more important, such a feeling of purity as the day when he had impulsively
taken off in a reckless endeavor to reach the headquarters of a half-surrounded
battalion, landed in a raging storm of heavy-artillery and mortar fire, and later
that evening eaten out of the same mess tin as the three officers of the battalion
staff, in a dugout shaken by gunfire, and felt himself the equal of those hardbaked
warriors.
“So allow me to present my army friend Captain Shchagov.”
Shchagov stood erect, refusing to lower himself by a show of respect for a
superior. He was pleasantly tipsy; he had drunk just enough not to feel the
pressure of his feet on the floor. And as he had become more relaxed, his
present surroundings had become more manageable, more welcoming—the
bright, warm room, the luxurious carpeting and solid furniture that spoke of
assured affluence, a milieu he had entered with his nagging wounds and
unslaked hunger merely to reconnoiter but that promised to become his future.
Shchagov had been feeling ashamed of his modest decorations in this
company, where a beardless boy wore the ribbon of the Order of Lenin pinned
casually askew. But as soon as the famous writer saw those campaign medals
and the two wound stripes, he swung his hand at Shchagov’s and shook it
heartily.
“Major Galakhov!” he said, smiling. “Which front were you on? Come and
sit down and tell me about it.”
They moved to the settee, making Innokenty and Dotty move up. They invited
Ernst to join them, but he made a sign and disappeared, rightly assuming that
this meeting of old warriors should not be a dry occasion. Shchagov told them
how he and Golovanov had become friends in Poland, one mad day in 1944
(September 5), when Soviet troops had broken through to the Narev and their
impetus had carried them over the river, fording it on planks almost, because
they knew that it was easy enough on the first day but that on the second they
wouldn’t have a dog’s chance. They had cheekily pushed their way through the
Germans along a corridor no more than a kilometer wide, and the Germans had
tried to cut them off, throwing in three hundred tanks from the north and two
hundred from the south.
As soon as they began exchanging wartime memories, Shchagov forgot the
language he used every day in the university, and Galakhov forgot not only the
language of publishing houses and writers’ committees but even more
completely the carefully calculated and controlled idiom in which books are
written. It was impossible to convey the full-blooded drama, the smoky tang of
life at the front in those well-worn, smoothly polished literary locutions.
Before they had spoken a dozen words, they felt a desperate need for oaths that
were quite unthinkable in that place.
Golovanov reappeared with three glasses and a half-empty bottle of cognac.
He moved a chair up so that he could see both of them and filled the three
glasses.
“To soldiers’ friendship!” Galakhov said, screwing up his eyes.
“To those who didn’t come back!” was Shchagov’s toast.
They drank. The empty bottle went behind the settee.
Golovanov steered the conversation his own way. He told them how on that
memorable day he, a newly fledged war correspondent two months out of the
university, had traveled to a forward position for the first time, got a ride on a
truck (carrying antitank mines to Shchagov), and sped from Dlugosiedlo to
Kabat along a corridor so narrow that the “Northern Germans” were lobbing
mortar bombs onto the “Southern German” positions, and how on that same day
one Soviet general returning to the front from home leave drove straight into
the German lines in his Jeep. That was the end of him.
Innokenty had been listening, and he asked them what the fear of death felt
like. Golovanov, in full flow, answered promptly that at such desperate
moments you don’t fear death; you simply don’t think about it. Shchagov raised
his eyebrows and demurred.
“You aren’t afraid of death until you get really shaken up. I was never afraid
of anything until I experienced that. I got in the way of a heavy air raid, and for
some time after, I was afraid of bombs and nothing else. Then I got shellshocked
and became afraid of artillery. People say you needn’t be afraid of the
whistling bullet; of course not, the one you hear isn’t meant for you. You won’t
hear the one that kills you. Death needn’t really concern you; while you exist,
death doesn’t; when death comes, you’re no more.”
They had put “Baby Come Back to Me” on the record player.
Shchagov’s and Golovanov’s reminiscences did not interest Galakhov. He
had not witnessed the operation they were talking about; he did not know
Dlugosiedlo and Kabat; and, what was more, he had not been a small-time
correspondent like Golovanov but a strategic commentator. Battles, in his
mind, did not take place around a rotten plank bridge or a shattered water
tower; his was the wider vision, the field marshal’s view of the overall logic
of events.
So Galakhov gave the conversation a new twist.
“War, war, war. We go into it ridiculous civilians and come back with hearts
of bronze. Erik, did they sing ‘The Song of the Front-Line Correspondents’ in
your sector?”
“Didn’t they, though!”
“Nera!” Galakhov called out. “Come over here, Nera. Come and help us sing
the ‘Front-Line Correspondents’song.”
Dinera came closer, nodding eagerly. “Whatever you say, my friends. I was a
front-line girl myself!”
They turned the record player off and began singing, the three of them. What
they lacked as musicians they made up for in sincerity.
From Moscow to the border
We advance in battle order. . . .
An audience gathered around them. The younger guests stared curiously at
Galakhov. You didn’t meet a celebrity like him every day.
From vodka and rough weather
Our throats are like cracked leather
But we’ll thank you kindly not to say a word. . . .
The moment they began singing, Shchagov went cold inside. He kept on
smiling, but he felt guilty toward those who could not be present, those who
had swallowed the waters of the Dnieper back in 1941 or taken a mouthful of
Novgorod pine needles in 1942. These wordsmiths didn’t really know the front
line, which they had now turned into a holy place. There was an unbridgeable
gulf between even the most daring of war correspondents and the front-line
soldier, a gulf as wide as that between an aristocrat who cultivated his land
and a peasant plowman. War correspondents were not tied by service
regulations and officers’ orders to the immediate business of fighting, so
nobody could call it treason if they showed fright, refused to lay down their
lives, and fled from the battle zone. Hence the psychological gulf that yawned
between the front-line soldier, whose legs had taken root in some outpost, who
had no escape and might die right there, and the war correspondent who had
wings and who could be back in his Moscow apartment the day after
tomorrow. And anyway, where did they get all that vodka that made them so
hoarse? From the C in C’s ration? A soldier got 200, or as little as 150, grams
before going into an attack.
In the places where they sent us
No tanks were ever lent us.
If a newsman should get killed, then never mind.
In a worn-out Moskvich roadster
Armed with an empty holster
We entered cities first—and the rest behind.
This “entered first” referred to two or three anecdotal occasions when war
correspondents who couldn’t read a relief map properly rushed along a good
road (a Moskvich couldn’t manage a bad one), landed in some town in noman’s-land,
and tore out again like scalded cats back the way they had come.
Innokenty listened, head down, and found a meaning of his own in the song.
He knew nothing at all about war, but he did know about Soviet
newspapermen. Your Soviet reporter was not the hard-done-by character
celebrated in these verses. He did not lose his job for missing a scoop. He had
only to show his press card and he was treated like a person in authority,
someone entitled to issue “directives.” The information he obtained might be
correct or incorrect; he might send it to his paper in good time or with some
delay; his career did not depend on that but on ideological correctness. A
correspondent with the correct worldview had no real need to rush off to some
hellhole in the battle zone. He could write his dispatches just as well behind
the lines.
Dotty’s hand had closed around her husband’s wrist, and she sat quietly
beside him, content neither to speak nor to understand the clever talk. This was
her most delightful habit. She wanted just to sit there like a dutiful wife and let
everybody see how happy they were together.
Little did she know how, very soon now, she would be bullied and
terrorized, whether Innokenty was picked up here or got clean away and
remained over there.
When she had thought of nothing but herself, when she had been insensitive
and domineering, eager to crush him, to force her own shoddy values on him,
Innokenty had thought—Very well, let her suffer, let her learn her lesson, it will
do her good.
But this was the old, the gentle Dotty, and he was acutely sorry for her. He
had been unfair.
He felt more painfully ill at ease, unhappier from one moment to the next. It
was high time for him to leave this stupid party—if only he could be sure that
worse did not await him at home!
Klara emerged from the half-darkened smaller room after a perfunctory
attempt to adjust an erratic television set for the benefit of would-be viewers.
She stood in the doorway, amazed to see Innokenty and Dotnara sitting so close
and contentedly together, and realized, not for the first time, that every
marriage has unfathomable secrets best not disturbed.
The party had really been arranged for her, but she had not enjoyed it one
little bit. Indeed, she had found it painful and depressing. She had rushed
around making people welcome and trying to keep them happy, but her heart
was not in it. Nothing amused her; none of the guests interested her. And the
new dress, green crêpe satin with brighter insets in the collar and the bodice
and at the wrists, probably did no more for her than all her others.
She had allowed a new acquaintance, the square-headed critic, to be wished
on her, but their exchanges had been cool, artificial, and somehow unnatural.
He had sat on the sofa for half an hour, argued about nothing with Dinera for
another half hour, then started drinking with the other old soldiers. Klara felt
no urge to latch onto him and lure him or drag him away.
But she would not have many more chances. She would not be in bloom
much longer. If she missed her chance now, she could expect something older
and worse, or nothing at all.
Had it been only that morning? Right there in Moscow? That thrilling
conversation, the blue-eyed boy’s ecstatic look, the soul-shaking kiss, and . . .
her solemn promise to wait. Was it only today that she had spent three hours
braiding a basket for a New Year’s tree?
It could not have been on planet Earth. It could not have been in the flesh.
Nothing like it had happened in a quarter of a century. She must have dreamed
it.