Chapter-49-Life-Is-Not-a-Novel

ATTHATSAME MOMENT, as a few sparse snowflakes reluctantly fell on the
dark roadway of Matrosskaya Tishina Street, from which the wheels of cars
had licked the last traces of recent snow, life for the girls in Room 318 of the
Graduate Student Building on the Stromynka went on as it usually did on a late
Sunday afternoon.
The big square window of Room 318 looked out on Matrosskaya Tishina.
The long sides of the room went from window to door, and on each side three
iron beds, head to foot, hugged the wall, with three rickety sets of wicker
bookshelves between them. Two tables stood in line in the middle of the room,
leaving only a narrow passage on each side between themselves and the beds.
The one nearer to the window, heaped with books, exercise books, drawings,
and reams of typescript, was the “dissertation” table; the other was for general
purposes and at that moment was occupied by Olenka, who was ironing; Muza,
who was writing a letter; and Lyuda, who was taking her curlers out with the
aid of a mirror. All this left room for a washbasin, curtained off against the
wall by the door (the girls were supposed to wash at the end of the hallway,
but it was uncomfortable, cold, and too far away).
On the bed nearest the washbasin, Erzhika, the Hungarian girl, lay reading.
She was wearing the robe known to her roommates as the “Brazilian flag.” She
had other exotic robes, which delighted the girls, but dressed very soberly
when she went out, almost as though she were trying not to attract attention.
She had got into the habit during her years in the Communist underground in
Hungary.
The next bed in the row, Lyuda’s, was a mess—Lyuda had just gotten up, and
the blanket and sheet were trailing on the floor—but her blue silk dress, freshly
ironed, and her stockings were carefully draped over the headboard and the
pillows. A Persian mat hung above her bed. Lyuda herself, seated at the table,
was loudly telling everybody how a certain Spanish poet, deported from his
motherland in his boyhood, had paid court to her. She recalled in detail the
decor of the restaurant, the orchestra, the menu, all the trimmings, what they
had drunk. . . .
Olenka’s iron was connected by a cord and “cheat” plug to the light fixture
over the table. (To prevent waste of electricity, irons and electric hotplates
were strictly forbidden in the Stromynka dormitory. There were no outlets, and
the whole maintenance staff went around checking for “cheat” plugs.) Olenka
listened to Lyuda, laughing occasionally, but paid close attention to her ironing.
That jacket and the skirt that went with it meant everything to her. She would
sooner have scorched her own flesh with the iron than that two-piece outfit.
Olenka had only her grant to live on and never ate anything but potatoes and
gruel; she saved the twenty kopecks of her trolley fare whenever she could get
away with it and had nothing to decorate the wall above her bed except a map;
but at least her evening finery was of good quality, and she had no need to be
ashamed of any part of it.
Muza, who was far too plump and looked more than her thirty years with her
rather coarse features and glasses, was having difficulty writing her letter on a
table rocked by Olenka’s ironing, and with Lyuda’s tiresome story making her
feel inferior. She would always have thought it rude to ask another person to
stop talking. Trying to shut Lyuda up would simply have encouraged her to
behave even more brazenly. Lyuda, a new arrival, was not studying for a higher
degree. Having just graduated from the Institute of Finance, she was there
ostensibly to attend a few classes in political economy but mainly to amuse
herself. Her father, a retired general, sent her a lot of pocket money from
Voronezh.
Lyuda had a primitive belief that only her encounters with men and her
relations with them gave meaning to a woman’s life. But the story she was now
telling had a piquancy all its own. After three months of marriage at home in
Voronezh and affairs with various other men, Lyuda had begun to regret that her
virginity seemed to have passed in a twinkling. So, from the very first words
exchanged with her Spanish poet, she had played the part of an ingénue,
starting and prudishly shying away from the lightest touch on shoulder or
elbow, and when the smitten poet’s entreaties were at last rewarded with a
kiss—“the first in her life”—she shuddered, oscillated between ecstasy and
despair, and inspired twenty-four lines of verse, unfortunately not in Russian.
Muza was writing to aged parents in a remote provincial town. Papa and
Mama were still just as much in love as newlyweds. Every morning as he left
for work, Papa kept looking back and waving to Mama until he turned the
corner, and Mama waved to him from the ventilation pane. Their daughter
loved them just as dearly and had got into the habit of writing often and
describing all her experiences in detail.
But now Muza was at a loss for words. Something had happened last Friday
evening that for two days now had overshadowed her tireless labor, day in and
day out, on Turgenev, the work that was her substitute for all else in life. What
she felt was deep disgust, as though she had smeared herself with something
obscene that could not be washed away or concealed or shown—something
that made existence impossible.
What had happened was that on Friday evening, when she got back from the
library and was getting ready for bed, she had been called into the dormitory’s
office and told to “step into the next room, please.” In the next room sat two
men in civilian clothes. They were very polite to begin with and introduced
themselves as Nikolai Ivanovich and Sergei Ivanovich. Quite unconcerned that
it was so late at night, they kept her there for an hour, two hours, three hours.
They began by asking the names of her roommates and fellow students in the
department (although of course they knew them as well as she did). Then
followed a leisurely discourse on patriotism, which focused on the patriotic
duty of all in the world of learning not to shut themselves up in their own
particular subjects but rather to serve their people with all their resources and
in every way possible. Muza saw no need to contradict; what they said was
absolutely correct. But then the Ivanovich brothers invited her to “assist” them,
meaning to meet one or the other of them at fixed intervals in this same office
or at a site where political agitators gathered or in a club or perhaps in the
university itself, the venue to be arranged, and there to answer specific
questions or report in written form what she had observed.
That was the beginning of a long nightmare! They began talking more and
more rudely, yelling at her, addressing her with insulting familiarity: “Why are
you such a pigheaded fool? Anybody would think we were foreign spies trying
to recruit you!” “She’d be as much use to a foreign spy as a fifth leg to a
horse!” Then they told her straight out that they wouldn’t let her present her
thesis (she had only a month or two to go, and the thesis was nearly finished)
and that they would ruin her academic career because sniveling ninnies like
her were not the sort of scholars the country needed. This frightened her very
much: It would be only too easy for them to get her expelled from graduate
school. But then they took out a gun, “accidentally” pointing it at Muza as it
was passed between them. The effect was the opposite of that intended. Her
fear vanished. To be expelled from the university with a black mark against her
would be worse than dying. The Ivanoviches released her at one in the
morning, giving her until the following Tuesday, December 27, to think things
over, and first making her sign a statement not to divulge any of this. They
assured her that they got to know everything and that if she told anybody about
their conversation or the document she had signed, she would be arrested and
imprisoned immediately.
By what unlucky chance had the choice fallen on her? Now she was waiting
hopelessly for Tuesday, incapable of working, remembering how so very
recently she had no need to think about anything except Turgenev, when she had
no oppressive weight on her mind but had stupidly failed to realize how lucky
she was.
Olenka listened to Lyuda with a smile on her face. At one point she burst out
laughing with her mouth full of water and nearly choked. Olenka had waited
rather a long time because of the war, but now at twenty-eight she was as
happy as could be and could forgive everybody everything—let them all find
their happiness wherever they could; she had a lover, also a graduate student,
and he would be coming to take her out that evening.
“I said to him, you Spaniards attach so much importance to honor, but now
you have kissed me on the lips and I am dishonored!”
Fair-haired Lyuda’s attractive if rather hard face expressed the despair of a
girl dishonored.
All this time, skinny Erzhika lay reading Galakhov’s Selected Works. This
book was her introduction to a world of lofty, noble characters whose flawless
integrity astounded Erzhika. Galakhov’s personages were never shaken by
doubt as to whether they should serve their country, whether or not they should
sacrifice themselves. Erzhika still had a rather poor knowledge of the country’s
language and customs, which must be why she had yet to see such people for
herself, but that only made it all the more important to learn about them from
books.
All the same, she lowered her book, rolled on to her side, and joined Lyuda’s
audience. Here, in Room 318, she sometimes heard the most extraordinary and
paradoxical things, such as that an engineer had refused to go work on a
fascinating development site in Siberia and stayed on in Moscow selling beer
instead, or that someone had presented a successful thesis and was now doing
nothing at all. (“Can there really be unemployment in the Soviet Union?”) Or
that to obtain a Moscow residence permit, you had to bribe the militia heavily.
“Surely that’s just a momentary phenomenon?” asked Erzhika. (She meant
“temporary.”)
Lyuda continued the story of herself and the poet by saying that if she married
him, there would be nothing for it but to put on a convincing show of being a
virgin. And she went on to confide in them just how she intended to act the part
on their first night.
Muza’s brow was creased by suffering. It wouldn’t be polite to put her hands
over her ears with others looking. She made an excuse to turn away to her bed.
Olenka, though, sang out gaily, “You mean that the heroines of world
literature had no need at all to confess their guilt to their bridegrooms and
finish themselves off?”
“Of course the silly things didn’t have to,” Lyuda said with a laugh. “It’s
really very simple!”
However, Lyuda wasn’t at all sure whether she should marry the poet.
“He isn’t a member of the Writers Union, and he only writes in Spanish, so
what sort of royalties will he be getting? He can’t expect anything much!”
Erzhika was so shocked that she swung her feet to the floor. “You mean
people in the Soviet Union marry for money, too?”
“When you’ve been around a bit, you’ll know,” Lyuda said, looking in the
mirror. All her curlers were out now, and a mass of tight blond ringlets
trembled as she tossed her head. Any one of them would be enough to ensnare
a poetic youth.
“Listen, girls, I’m coming to the conclusion—” Erzhika began but broke off
as she noticed the strange, downcast look on Muza’s face. She seemed to be
staring at something on the floor near Erzhika. Erzhika drew her legs up onto
the bed and cried out, looking horrified, “Did one just go by?”
The girls burst out laughing. Nothing had gone by.
There, in Room 318, sometimes in broad daylight but more impudently still
at night, fearsome Russian rats ran around squeaking, their paws beating a neat
tattoo on the bare floor. Through all the years of struggle against Horthy,
Erzhika had never dreaded anything as she now dreaded the thought that these
rats might jump onto her bed and run over her body. In daylight the laughter of
her friends helped to drive these fears away, but at night she tucked her blanket
in tightly, covering herself from head to foot, and vowed that if she lived till
morning she would leave Stromynka. Nadya, a chemistry student, occasionally
brought poison and sprinkled it in the corners. The rats subsided for a while
but were soon up to their old tricks again. Two weeks ago, Erzhika’s
vacillations came to an end. It had to be Erzhika, and not one of the other girls,
who went one morning to draw water from the pail and brought up a drowned
baby rat in the mug. She shuddered in disgust whenever she remembered the
look of grave resignation on its little pointed face. Erzhika went that very day
to the Hungarian Embassy and asked them to find her a home in a private
apartment. The embassy addressed a request to the USSR Ministry of Foreign
Affairs; the Ministry of Foreign Affairs passed it to the Ministry of Higher
Education, which passed it on to the rector of the university, who referred it to
his Student Accommodation Department. Its reply was that (a) there were no
private lodgings available at present and (b) the complaint alleging that there
were rats at Stromynka was the first of its kind. The correspondence went full
circle and returned to the embassy, which nonetheless encouraged Erzhika to
believe that she would be given a room.
Sitting there in her Brazilian flag, hugging her knees to her chest, Erzhika
looked like an exotic bird.
“Girls, girls,” she wailed. “I like you all so much, I wouldn’t dream of
leaving you if it weren’t for the rats.”
It was both true and false. She did like the other girls, but there was no one
with whom she could share her acute anxieties about the destiny of Hungary.
Isolated as it was in Europe, something incomprehensible had been happening
in her country ever since the trial of László Rajk. Rumors reached her that
Communists she had known in the underground had been arrested. Rajk’s
nephew, also at Moscow University, and other Hungarian students had been
recalled, after which no letters had been received from any of them.
They heard the secret knock at the door (“Friends! No need to hide the
iron!”). Muza rose and, limping slightly (young as she was, she suffered from
rheumatism in her knee), went to lift the latch. Dasha, a tough girl with a large,
crooked mouth, entered in a hurry.
“Girls, girls, girls!” She was laughing loudly but did not forget to fasten the
door behind her. “I’ve got a suitor, and I nearly didn’t escape his clutches!
Which one, you ask? Go on, guess!”
“You mean to say you’re so well provided?” Lyuda, rummaging in her
suitcase, sounded surprised.
The university was in fact only slowly recovering from its wartime torpor.
There were few male graduate students, and somehow none of them was the
real thing.
“Hold on!” Olenka threw up her hands and fixed Dasha with a hypnotic stare.
“Was it ‘Jaws’?”
“Jaws” was a postgraduate student who had failed in dialectical and
historical materialism three times running and been written off as a hopeless
dunce.
“No, the Snackman!” crowed Dasha, pulling her earflapped hat from her
neatly piled dark hair and hanging it on a peg. She stood just as she was by the
door, in no hurry to remove the cheap coat with the lambskin collar made to
look like beaver fur, which she had obtained with coupons from the university
store three years ago.
“What, him?”
“I was on the trolley and he got on,” Dasha said, laughing. “He recognized
me right away. ‘Where do you get off?’ he asks. There was no escape; we got
off together. ‘Don’t you work at the baths now?’ he says. ‘I’ve been I don’t
know how many times, and you weren’t there.’ ”
“You should have told him. . . .” Dasha’s laughter had enveloped Olenka like
a spreading flame. “You should have . . . you should have told him. . . ,” but
she simply couldn’t finish. Roaring with laughter, she sank onto the bed, taking
care not to crease the two-piece outfit she had laid out there.
“What ‘Snackman’? What baths?” Erzhika wanted to know.
“You should have said . . .” Olenka made a great effort, but another fit of
laughter convulsed her. She stretched out her hands and tried to convey by
twiddling her fingers the message that refused to pass her larynx.
Lyuda, too, burst into laughter, as did the uncomprehending Erzhika, and even
Muza’s somber and homely features softened in a smile. She took her glasses
off to clean them.
“ ‘Where are you going?’ he says. ‘Who do you know on the campus?’ ”
Dasha was choking with laughter. “I said I know one of the women janitors.
She knits mittens.”
“Mi . . . mi . . . mit . . . tens!”
“Kni . . . kni . . . knits . . . mittens!”
Olenka was patted on the back, and they suppressed their laughter. Dasha
took her coat off. One look at her, so sturdy and lissome in her close-fitting
sweater and her tight-waisted skirt, told you that she could do any job, bending
and stretching all day long, without tiring. Turning back the flowery bedspread,
she perched cautiously on the edge of her bed, which was as neat and pretty as
any shrine, with its painstakingly plumped-up pillows, its lacy pillowcases,
and the embroidered antimacassars on the wall above it. She told Erzhika the
story.
“It was last autumn, while it was still warm, before you came. . . . I didn’t
know where to look for a boyfriend. There was nobody to introduce me to one.
So Lyudka advised me to go for a walk at Sokolniki, only by myself. Girls only
spoil their chances when they go around in pairs.”
“It never fails!” Lyuda confirmed. She was carefully wiping a spot from the
toe of her shoe.
“So off I went,” Dasha continued. There was no trace of merriment in her
voice now. “I walked about a bit, sat down, looked at the trees. And sure
enough, after a bit somebody came and sat by me, not too bad to look at. What
was he, I wondered. Turned out he worked in a snack bar. I didn’t want to tell
him I was a graduate student. Men are terrified of educated women as a rule.”
“Don’t say that!” Olenka protested. “That’s enough to drive anybody to
despair!”
When the iron monster of war was forced out, it left the world drastically
denuded. Where there should have been men their own age, or ten to fifteen
years older, moving and smiling, the war had left nothing but gaping black
holes. Education was the one bright hope left for that ill-fated generation of
women, and crude, senseless gibes could not be allowed to extinguish it.
“So I told him I was a cashier at a bathhouse. He wanted to know which one
and what shift I worked. I thought I would never get away. . . .”
Dasha’s cheerfulness had vanished. There was a wistful look in her dark
eyes. She had worked all day in the Lenin Library, eaten a meager and
unappetizing meal in the dining hall, and come home despondently anticipating
a Sunday evening with nothing to do and nothing to look forward to.
In the wood-built schoolhouse of her native village, her intermediate
schooling had been enjoyable. And going on to university had enabled her to
detach herself from the kolkhoz and obtain a Moscow residence permit. But
now she was a lot older; she had eighteen years of education behind her,
without a break. She was sick of studying till her head throbbed painfully . . .
and what was the point of it all? She wanted what any woman needs to make
her happy, to bear a child. But there was no one to give her a child, no one for
whom she could bear a child.
Pensively rocking herself, Dasha uttered her favorite saying in the now silent
room: “No, girls, life isn’t like in books.”
There was an agronomist who worked in the Machine and Tractor Station
back home. He wrote to Dasha, begging her to marry him. But any day now she
would have a higher degree, and the whole village would say, Why did the
silly girl need all that schooling? Just to marry an agronomist? Any work-team
leader can do that. At the same time, Dasha felt that even with a higher degree
she would be out of place, tied hand and foot: A teaching job in a university
would be a dead end; she would never break into those higher circles where
scholars enjoyed more freedom.
Women who entered the world of learning were praised to the skies,
promised the earth—which made it all the more painful when they collided
with hard reality.
Dasha had finished her zealous inspection of her lighthearted and fortunate
neighbor. “Lyuda, dear,” she said, “I would wash my feet if I were you!”
Lyuda looked round. “Should I?”
Unenthusiastically she retrieved a hotplate from its hiding place and attached
it to the “cheat” plug instead of the iron.
Dasha was never still. She had to be doing something—anything—to shake
off her misery. She remembered that she had bought a new article of
underwear. Not her size, but you grabbed whatever was going. She found the
thing and began taking it in.
Now that they had all quieted down, Muza could concentrate on her letter.
Alas, it refused to be written! She reread her last few sentences, altered one
word, and inked over a few illegible letters . . . but she was still getting
nowhere. Her mother and father would sense at once that the letter was a lie.
They would realize that their daughter was unhappy, that something nasty had
happened, and wonder why she couldn’t come straight out with it. Why was
she lying for the first time ever?
If there had been no one else in the room, Muza would have groaned aloud.
She would have simply howled, and perhaps that would have given her some
slight relief. As it was, she threw down her pen and propped herself up on her
elbows, hiding her face in her hands. So this was what it had come to! She had
to make a choice that would affect her whole life, and there was no one to
advise her, no one she could turn to for help now that she had signed that
pledge of secrecy. And on Tuesday she would have to appear again before
those two, so sure of themselves, with their well-rehearsed lines and their
clever tricks. Life had been so good just the day before yesterday! And now all
was lost. Because they would not give way. But neither could she. How could
she discuss the “Hamlet and Don Quixote principles in man,” remembering all
the time that she was an informer, that she had a code name—Daisy, maybe, or
Little Darling—and she had to collect information about the girls in the room
here or about her professor?
Muza tried to wipe the tears from her tight-shut eyes without anyone noticing.
“Where’s Nadya, then?” Dasha asked.
Nobody replied. Nobody knew.
But Dasha had thought of something to say about Nadya while she was
sewing. “What do you think, girls, how long can she keep it up? ‘Missing in
action,’she says. The war’s been over nearly five years now. Shouldn’t she cut
the cord?”
Muza threw up her arms and cried out in anguish. “How can you talk like
that?” The wide sleeves of her gray checked dress slipped back to her elbows,
baring her pudgy white forearms. “That’s what real love means! True love
doesn’t stop short at the grave!”
Olenka pursed her ripe lips in a wry smile.
“Lasts beyond the grave? That’s mystical nonsense, Muza. You don’t forget,
you have tender memories, but . . . love?”
“Of course,” Dasha insisted, “how can you love a person who simply
doesn’t exist?”
“Honestly, if I could I’d send her a certificate of burial myself,” Olenka said
warmly. “Tell her he’s dead, dead, dead and laid in the ground. Blasted war!
It’s five years ago now, and we still can’t get away from it.”
“During the war,” Erzhika put in, “many, many people were driven far away,
over the ocean. Maybe he’s still alive, somewhere over there.”
“It’s just possible,” Olga agreed. “Anyway, she can hope so. Still, Nadya has
one tiresome characteristic. She’s obsessed with her own sorrows and doesn’t
care about anybody else’s. In fact, if she didn’t have her sorrow, her life would
be pretty empty.”
Dasha waited until they had finished and then slowly drew the point of the
needle along the hem, as though sharpening it. She knew, when she had started
this conversation, how astonished they would shortly be.
“Listen, now, girls,” she said weightily. “Nadya is just fooling us. What she
says isn’t true. She doesn’t think her husband’s dead at all. She isn’t waiting
for a missing man to return. She knows that her husband’s alive. And she
knows just where he is.”
They all spoke at once: “What makes you think so?”
Dasha looked at them triumphantly. Her powers of observation had long ago
earned her a nickname among her roommates: “the investigator.”
“You have to know how to listen, darlings! Did she ever forget herself and
speak as if he were dead? Ne-ever. She doesn’t even like saying ‘he was’ this
or that. She takes care not to say either ‘he was’ or ‘he is.’ If he really were
missing, surely she would occasionally speak of him as though he were dead,
wouldn’t she?”
“What d’you think has become of him, then?”
“Can you really not guess?” cried Dasha, laying her sewing down altogether.
No, they couldn’t.
“He’s alive, but he’s left her! And she’s ashamed to admit it! So she’s
invented this ‘missing’story.”
“Now that I can believe!” said Lyuda, splashing away behind the curtain.
“Yes, indeed!”
“So she’s sacrificing herself for his sake,” Muza exclaimed. “There’s
obviously some reason for her to keep quiet and not marry again!”
Olenka couldn’t see that. “Why, what’s she waiting for?”
“You’re absolutely right, Dasha! You’re so clever!” said Lyuda, popping out
from behind the curtain in her slip, without her dressing gown, and barelegged,
which made her look taller and more shapely than ever. “She feels humiliated,
so she’s pretending to be a goody-goody, faithful forever to her dead husband.
She isn’t sacrificing a damn thing; she’s aching for somebody to be nice to her,
but nobody wants her! You know how it is; you can walk down the street, and
everybody looks around at you, but nobody would want her if she threw
herself at them.”
She disappeared behind the curtain.
“Shchagov comes to see her, though,” said Erzhika. The “shch” gave her
some difficulty.
“Comes to see her! That doesn’t mean a thing,” the invisible Lyuda retorted.
“He hasn’t taken the bait.”
Erzhika was puzzled.
“What does that mean, the bait?” she asked.
They all laughed. Dasha stuck to her theme. “No, listen. Maybe she’s still
hoping to get her husband back from the other woman?”
They heard the secret knock again: “Friend—don’t hide the iron.”
They all stopped talking. Dasha took the hook off. Nadya came in, dragging
her feet, looking old and drawn, as if she wanted to confirm Lyuda’s sneers.
Surprisingly, she didn’t address a single word of casual politeness to the
others, not so much as an “It’s only me,” or “What’s new, girls?” She hung up
her fur coat and went silently to her bed.
Erzhika resumed her reading. Muza hid her face in her hands again. Olenka
was stitching the pink buttons to her new blouse more securely.
Nobody had anything to say. To ease the awkward silence, Dasha said
weightily, as though summing up, “So you see, girls, life isn’t like in books.”