Chapter-24-The-Abyss-Beckons-Again

ENGINEER COLONEL YAKONOVLEFT the ministry by the side entrance in
Dzherzhinsky Street, rounded the black marble prow of the building, walked
through the Furkasov Street colonnade, and recognized his own Pobeda only
when he was about to grab the door handle of someone else’s car. There had
been thick fog all through the night. Snow had fallen fitfully and melted quickly.
It had now stopped. Now, toward dawn, it was foggy only near the ground, and
a film of brittle ice covered the puddles.
It was getting colder.
Nearly five o’clock, but the sky was still black. The only light was from the
streetlamps.
A first-year student who had spent the night in a doorway with his sweetheart
looked enviously at Yakonov as he got into his car. Would he ever have a car
himself? Would he ever take a girl for a drive? He had only ridden in a truck
so far. And only in the back. On the way to a kolkhoz to help with the harvest.
He couldn’t know how little he had to envy.
“Home?” the driver asked.
Yakonov stared unseeingly at the pocket watch in the palm of his hand.
“Home?” the driver repeated.
Yakonov started.
“Eh? No.”
“Marfino?” The driver was surprised. He was wearing felt boots and a
sheepskin coat, but he was chilled to the bone after his long wait and wanted to
get to bed.
“No,” the engineer colonel answered, pressing his hand to his chest just
above his heart.
The driver looked at his chief’s face in the dull lamplight filtering through the
windshield.
This wasn’t the chief he knew. Yakonov’s lips, usually complacently relaxed,
occasionally arrogantly pursed, were trembling helplessly.
And he was still holding the watch on the flat of his hand uncomprehendingly.
The driver had been waiting since midnight, furious with the colonel.
Cursing into his sheepskin collar, remembering every dirty trick the colonel
had played in the last two years. But he asked no more questions and drove off
at random. His rage had subsided.
Late night had passed into early morning. Only occasional cars passed them
on the empty streets. No policemen, no muggers, no one to mug. The trolleys
would be running soon.
The driver looked round at the colonel several times, wondering what to do.
By now he had sped as far as the Myasnitsky Gate, driven along the boulevards
to Trubnaya Square, and turned into Neglinnaya Street. But he couldn’t keep
this up till morning!
Yakonov stared straight ahead, his eyes unblinkingly fixed on nothing.
He lived on Bolshaya Serpukhovka. Calculating that once he saw his own
neighborhood the colonel would want to go home, the driver made for
Zamoskvoreche. He turned out of Okhotny Ryad onto Red Square, which was
deserted and forbidding.
There was frost on the battlements and the tops of fir trees along the Kremlin
Wall. Mist clung to the roadway under the wheels of the car.
Two hundred meters from them, behind the battlements that poets insisted on
calling sacred, beyond the guardhouses, sentry boxes, patrols, and lookouts,
dwelled, so those same poets said, the man they called the Unsleeping One, no
doubt now nearing the end of his solitary night’s work. They drove past
without giving him a thought.
It was only when they had driven downhill past Vasily Blazhenny and turned
left along the embankment that the driver braked and asked again:
“Would you like to go home, Comrade Colonel?”
That was certainly what he ought to do. For all he knew, the nights he would
be spending at home could be counted on his fingers. But just as a dog runs off
to die alone, Yakonov felt that he must go somewhere else, get away from his
family.
He drew the folds of his leather coat around him, got out of the Pobeda, and
said to the driver: “Go home and get some sleep, old fellow. I’ll walk from
here.”
It wasn’t the first time he had called his driver “old fellow.” But there was
such sadness in his voice that he seemed to be saying good-bye forever.
Moscow River was shrouded in wreathing mist from bank to bank.
With his overcoat unbuttoned and his colonel’s tall fur hat awry, Yakonov set
off along the slippery embankment.
The driver thought of calling out to him, or even going with him, then thought,
High-ups like him don’t drown themselves, turned the car around, and drove
away.
Yakonov walked along an unbroken stretch of the embankment, with the river
on his right and an endless wooden fence on his left. He kept to the middle of
the asphalted path, his eyes fixed unblinkingly on the distant street lamps.
When he had gone some way, he began to feel that this one-man funeral
procession was giving him a simple enjoyment such as he had not experienced
for a long time.
When they were summoned to the ministry for the second time, the worst had
happened. It was as though all the ceilings above had caved in on them.
Abakumov had raged like a wild beast, springing at them, chasing them round
the office, swearing obscenely, spitting at them, and landing a punch on
Yakonov’s face that was obviously meant to hurt and that drew blood from his
soft white nose.
He had demoted Selivanovsky to the rank of lieutenant and sent him to an
outpost in the polar regions. Oskolupov he had sent back to Butyrki Prison,
where he had begun in 1925, to resume his career as an ordinary guard.
Yakonov himself had been put under arrest for deception and repeated
sabotage but sent back to Number Seven, to put on blue overalls, work beside
Bobynin, and put the Scrambler in working order with his own hands.
Then he had recovered his breath and given them a new, and final, deadline:
the Lenin anniversary.
The big, tasteless office swam before Yakonov’s eyes; the floor heaved. He
tried to stem the nosebleed with a handkerchief. He stood before Abakumov
helplessly, thinking of those with whom he spent only one hour in twenty-four
but for whom alone he schemed and struggled and bullied every other hour of
his waking day: two little girls, one eight, one nine, and his wife, Varyusha,
who was all the more precious because it had been a late marriage. He had
been thirty-six at the time and had barely emerged from the gates toward which
the minister’s iron fist was pushing him again.
After all this Selivanovsky had taken Oskolupov and Yakonov to his own
office and threatened to put the two of them behind bars rather than incur
demotion and relegation to the Far North.
And then Oskolupov had taken Yakonov to his office and declared that
henceforth he would always be conscious of the connection between
Yakonov’s jailbird past and his present acts of sabotage.
By now Yakonov had reached a high concrete bridge, over which on the right
bank lay Zamoskvoreche. But instead of taking this way out, he went on under
the bridge, where a militiaman was walking up and down on guard. The
militiaman’s suspicious gaze followed the strange drunk wearing pince-nez and
a colonel’s tall hat.
Farther on, Yakonov crossed a short bridge over a narrow channel. He had
reached the Yauza, where it falls into the Moskva, but he did not even look to
see where he was going.
Yes, they had been caught up in a crazy game, and now it was coming to an
end. It wasn’t the first time Yakonov had witnessed and been drawn into an
insane, an impossible scramble, in which the whole country—with its people’s
commissars and oblast secretaries, scientists, engineers, directors and site
managers, shop foremen and team leaders, workmen and women on collective
farms—was swept off its feet. Whoever you are and whatever you set out to
do, you very soon find yourself in the grip, the stranglehold, of arbitrary,
impossible, crippling schedules! Give us more! Faster! Faster still! Fulfill the
norm! Overfulfill the norm! Fulfill it three times over! Work a voluntary shift!
Beat the deadline! Beat it by a bigger margin! Buildings and bridges collapsed,
crops rotted in the fields or never came up at all, and the man who found
himself in this mad whirl, which meant every single person, had no escape
except to fall sick, get caught in the machinery, go mad, get run over so that he
could have a rest at last in a hospital or health resort, let them forget about him,
breathe forest air—then again, yet again, gradually slip back into harness.
Only sick people alone with their illness (and not in a hospital!) could live
an untroubled life in the Soviet Union.
Yakonov, however, had always managed so far to skip nimbly from projects
doomed by over-haste to others where life was quieter or which were at an
early stage.
Now, for the first time, he felt that he was trapped. The scrambler project
couldn’t be salvaged in such a hurry. He had nowhere else to go. And he’d left
it too late to fall sick.
He stood at the parapet and looked over it. The fog had settled low on the
ice, leaving it bare in places. Immediately below, Yakonov could see a dark
patch where the ice had melted.
It was as if the black hole of his prison years had opened up to receive him
again.
To Yakonov those six years were a hideous gap in his life, as if he had been
stricken by plague, the greatest of catastrophes.
He had been jailed in 1932, as a young radio engineer, after two trips abroad
on official business, which were the reason for his imprisonment.
He had then been one of the first convicts recruited by one of the early
sharashkas.
How he had longed to forget his prison past! And for others to forget it! For
fate to forget it! How anxiously he had shunned all who reminded him of that
disastrous time, all who remembered him as a convict!
He tore himself away from the parapet, cut across the embankment, and for
no good reason went up a steep rise. He came out onto a path that skirted the
long fence around yet another construction site. A well-trodden path, where it
was less slippery.
Only the central card index at the Ministry of State Security knew that the
ministry’s uniforms sometimes concealed former convicts.
There were two others in the Marfino Institute, as well as Yakonov.
He scrupulously avoided them, did his best not to get into conversation with
them off duty, and never saw them alone in his office, in case people started
imagining things.
One of them, Knyazhenetsky, a septuagenarian professor of chemistry, had
been Mendeleev’s favorite student. He had served the prescribed ten years and
then, in recognition of a long list of scientific achievements, had been sent to
Marfino. He had worked there as a “free” employee for three years, but then
the whiplash of the “Instruction on the Reinforcement of the Rear” had caught
even him. A telephone call summoned him to the ministry, and he did not
return. Yakonov would always remember Knyazhenetsky descending the
institute’s red-carpeted stairway, shaking his silvery head, wondering why he
had been called in for half an hour, while as soon as his back was turned,
Shikin, the security officer, had taken out a penknife and removed a photograph
of the professor from the institute’s honors board on the upper landing.
The other one, Altynov, was not distinguished, just efficient. His first term of
imprisonment had made him taciturn, distrustful, as quick to suspect the worst
as only the convict clan can be. So as soon as the “Instruction” began
insinuating itself into every nook and cranny of the city, Altynov wangled his
way into a heart clinic. He played the part so realistically and for so long that
the doctors gave up on him, and his friends no longer lowered their voices in
his presence, realizing that after thirty years of excruciating anxiety, his heart
had simply given out. And now Yakonov, doomed a year ago as an ex-convict,
was doomed yet again as a saboteur.
The abyss was calling its children home.
. . . YAKONOVWAS CLIMBING a path over waste ground, not noticing where he
was going or that it was uphill.
He stopped at last, out of breath. His tired feet ached from stumbling over
uneven ground. As his vision cleared, he looked back downhill to take his
bearings.
In the hour since he had left his car, the waning night had grown much colder.
The mist had cleared. The ground underfoot, strewn with rubble and broken
glass, the tumbledown shed or watchman’s hut nearby, and a fence left standing
around an abandoned building site down below were touched with white—
frost or snow?
There were white steps set in this hillside, so close to the center of Moscow,
yet so strangely desolate. Perhaps seven steps, then a gap, then more steps.
These steps stirred a vague recollection. Yakonov, wondering, climbed them,
followed the cinder path above, then up more steps. The building to which the
steps led was not clearly visible. Its shape was so strange that it seemed to be
in ruins yet miraculously preserved.
Did it mark a spot where bombs had fallen? But all bomb damage in
Moscow had been cleared away. What destructive force could have been at
work here?
A paved terrace had once separated the two flights of steps. Now great
fragments of flagstones lay on the steps, making it difficult to climb them.
The steps led up to wide iron doors, shut fast and blocked knee-deep by
heaps of rubble.
Of course! Of course! Yakonov winced under the lash of memory. He looked
about him. Its course marked by rows of streetlights, the river wound its way
down below, disappearing with a strangely familiar bend under a bridge and
on to the Kremlin.
But where was the bell tower? It was no longer there. Or were those heaps
of stone what had been the bell tower?
Yakonov’s eyes were smarting. He squinted.
He sat down on the broken stones that littered the porch.
Twenty-two years ago he had stood on this very spot with a girl named
Agnia.