Chapter-55-Prince-Igor

RUBIN BEGAN SPEAKING as easily and fluently as if his eyes really were
skimming a written document (he had been tried or retried four times over, and
the procedural formulas were imprinted on his memory).
“Act of indictment on completion of investigation of case number five
million slash three million six hundred and fifty-one thousand, nine hundred
and seventy-four, the accused being Olgovich, Igor Svyatoslavich.
“The prosecution in the present case is brought against Olgovich, I. S., by the
Organs of State Security. Investigation has established that Olgovich, being at
the time leader of the valiant Russian army in the field, holding the title of
prince and the post of commander of a warrior band, proved to be a dastardly
traitor to his motherland. His treasonable activity took the form of surrendering
of his own free will to Khan Konchak, now unmasked as a sworn enemy of our
people, and furthermore surrendering into captivity his son Vladimir Igorevich,
as also his brother, his nephew, and the full complement of his warrior band
with all their arms and all supplies and equipment for which he was
responsible.
“His treasonable conduct manifested itself further in the fact that he from the
very beginning allowed himself to be taken in by a trick, to wit, an eclipse of
the sun, contrived by the reactionary clergy, and in consequence did not take
the lead in mass political briefing of his warrior band as it set out to ‘quaff the
Don from its helmets.’ I make no mention here of the unhygienic condition of
the Don River in those years, before the introduction of double chlorination.
Instead of all this, the accused confined himself to a completely irresponsible
exhortation to his army, when already in sight of the Polovtsians.
Brothers, this we sought, let us now stif en our sinews!
INVESTIGATOR’S REPORT, VOL. 1, SHEET36
“The disastrous significance for our motherland of the defeat of the combined
warrior bands of Novgorod-Seversk, Kursk, and Putivl is best characterized in
the words of Svyatoslav, grand prince of Kiev:
God gave the heathen into my hand to chasten them
But thy youth was hasty.
IBID., VOL. 1, SHEET88
“It is, however, a naive mistake on the part of Svyatoslav, resulting from his
class blindness, to ascribe the poor organization of the whole campaign and the
fragmentation of Russia’s military effort to the youth of the accused, failing to
understand that what we are concerned with here is a treasonable act planned
long in advance.
“The criminal himself has succeeded in eluding interrogation and trial, but
we have from the witness Borodin, Aleksandr Porphirievich, and also a
witness who has expressed a wish to remain unknown and will henceforth be
known as the Author of the Lay, irrefutable depositions not only exposing the
abominable role of Prince I. S. Olgovich during his conduct of the battle itself,
which was joined in meteorological conditions unfavorable to the Russian
command:
The winds blow, bearing now the arrows,
Raining them upon Igor’s ranks
and in equally unfavorable tactical conditions:
From all sides the enemies advance,
Hemming our men in all ways.
IBID., VOL. 1, SHEETS 123, 124; DEPOSITION OF THE AUTHOR OF THE LAY
but also revealing the still more revolting behavior of Olgovich and his
princely offspring in captivity. The living conditions of both of them in socalled
captivity show that they stood high in the favor of Khan Konchak and
objectively were being rewarded by the Polovtsian high command for the
treasonable surrender of their warrior band.
“Thus, for instance, it is established by the testimony of the witness Borodin
that, while in captivity, Prince Igor had a horse of his own, and indeed more
than one:
Take any horse, choose where thou wilt!
IBID., VOL. 1, SHEET233
“Khan Konchak, on this occasion, said to Prince Igor:
Dost thou yet think thyself a prisoner?
Is it a prisoner’s life thou leadest?
Art thou not rather my dear guest?
IBID., VOL. 1, SHEET281
and further
Say truly—is this the way a prisoner lives?
IBID., VOL. 1, SHEET300
“The Polovtsian khan here reveals the full cynicism of his relations with the
traitor prince:
For your valor, for your great daring
I have come to love you, prince.
INVESTIGATOR’S REPORT, VOL. 2, SHEET5
“More thorough investigation has revealed that these cynical relations
existed long before the battle on the Kayala River:
For thou wert always dear to me.
IBID., SHEET14; TESTIMONYOF THE WITNESS BORODIN
and even
Thy faithful ally, trusty friend and brother
And not thy foe I’d be. . . .
IBID.
“All this puts the accused in focus as an active aider and abettor of Khan
Konchak and a Polovtsian agent and spy of long standing.
“On the basis of the facts here set out, Olgovich, Igor Svyatoslavich, born
1151, native of the city of Kiev, Russian, not a Party member, no previous
convictions, citizen of the USSR, warlord by trade, having served as
commander of a warrior band with the rank of prince, and having been
awarded the Varangian Order, First Class, the Order of the Little Red Sun, and
the Golden Shield medal, is charged as follows: that he committed a vile act of
treachery to his motherland, accompanied by sabotage, espionage, and
collaboration over many years with the Polovtsian khanate, that is to say, that
he committed the crimes envisaged in Article 58, subsections 1b, 6, 9, and 11
of the Criminal Code of the Russian Socialist Federation of Soviet Republics.
“Olgovich is by his own admission guilty of the charges brought against him
and stands convicted by the testimony of witnesses in the form of a poem and
an opera.
*
“In accordance with article 208 of the Criminal Procedural Code of the
RSFSR, the present case has been referred to the prosecutor so that he may
bring the accused to trial.”
Rubin paused to take a deep breath and triumphantly surveyed the assembled
zeks. Swept along on the flood tide of his fantasy, he could no longer stop.
Peals of laughter from the bunks and the doorway spurred him on. He had
already said more and spoken more caustically than he would normally wish to
with a sprinkling of stoolies among his audience or to people bitterly hostile to
the regime.
Spiridon, under the graying ginger mop straggling over his brow and ears and
down his neck, had not laughed once. He surveyed the scene with a frown.
Fifty years old and a Russian, he had never heard of this prince of long ago
who had been taken prisoner, but faced with the familiar surroundings of the
courtroom and the impregnable self-assurance of the prosecutor, he relived his
own experiences, and instinctively understood the gross unfairness of the
prosecutor’s arguments and the woes of the hapless prince.
Nerzhin spoke again, in the same nasal drawl.
“In view of the absence of the accused, and there being no need to crossexamine
witnesses, we will proceed to counsel’s arguments. I call upon the
prosecutor again.”
He glanced at Zemelya, his jury man, who nodded agreement to this and
whatever was to come.
“Comrade Judges!” Rubin cried sternly. “I have only a little to add to the
concatenation of terrible accusations, the foul tangle of crimes that has been
unraveled before your eyes. I should like first to reject emphatically the
decadent view so widely held that a wounded man has a moral right to
surrender. That is radically opposed to our way of thinking, Comrades.
Especially where Prince Igor is concerned. We are told that he was wounded
on the field of battle. But what proof is there of that 765 years later? Has any
record of his wound, signed by the divisional medical officer, been preserved?
One thing is sure, that no such document is on the investigator’s file, Comrade
Judges!”
Amantai Bulatov took off his glasses, and without their bold, mischievous
twinkle, his eyes were quite sad.
He, Pryanchikov, Potapov, and several others among the prisoners crowding
around had been imprisoned for “betraying their country” in precisely the same
way: surrendering “voluntarily.”
“Furthermore,” the prosecutor thundered, “I wish to draw special attention to
the disgusting behavior of the accused in the Polovtsian camp. Prince Igor has
no thought at all for his motherland, only for his wife:
Thou art alone, my dove, my pretty one,
Thou art alone. . . .
“Analytically this is entirely understandable, since his Yaroslavna is a young
wife, and his second, and obviously such a female is not greatly to be relied
on, but the fact is that Prince Igor stands revealed as an utterly selfish man.
Anyway, for whom, I ask you, were the Polovtsian dances danced? For him, of
course! And his odious offspring promptly enters into a sexual liaison with
Konchak’s daughter, although Soviet subjects are categorically forbidden by
the relevant competent organs to marry foreign women! And this at a time when
Soviet-Polovtsian relations were strained to the utmost—”
Kagan piped up from his bunk: “Just a moment! How does the prosecutor
know that the Soviet regime already existed in Russia at that time?”
Nerzhin hammered for order: “Bailiff! Remove that venal agent of a foreign
power!” But before Bulatov could move, Rubin deftly parried the thrust.
“Allow me to reply! Dialectical analysis of the text gives convincing proof.
Read what the Author of the Lay says: ‘Red banners flap in the breeze at
Putivl.’ That seems clear enough. The noble prince Vladimir Galitsky, head of
the Putivl district office of the Commissariat of War, is recruiting a people’s
militia, consisting of Skula and Yeroshka, to defend their native city at the very
time when Prince Igor is ogling the naked limbs of Polovtsian women. I readily
concede that we can sympathize with him here, but then Konchak invites him to
choose ‘whichever beauty pleases thee.’ Why, then, does the wretch not avail
himself? Who among you here present can believe that a man would
voluntarily deny himself a woman? We find hidden here the ultimate cynicism;
expose it, and the accused has not a leg to stand on. I mean his so-called
escape from captivity and his ‘voluntary’ return to the motherland! Who can
believe that a man who has been offered ‘whichever horse thou wouldst, and
gold’ would voluntarily abandon all that and return to his motherland? How
could it possibly be so?”
That very question had been put to returning ex–prisoners of war, Spiridon
among them, by their interrogators: Why would you be returning, unless
they’ve recruited you?
“There can be only one explanation: Prince Igor had been enrolled by the
Polovtsian intelligence service and planted to disrupt the Kievan state!
Comrade Judges! I, like you, am seething with noble indignation. I humanely
demand that you sentence the son of a bitch to be hanged! Or rather, since
capital punishment has been abolished, that you clobber him with twenty-five
years inside, followed by five years’ deprivation of civil rights. In addition, I
ask for a special recommendation of the court that the opera Prince Igor be
banned as completely amoral and tending to popularize treasonable attitudes
among Soviet youth! Borodin, A. P., a witness in this case, should face
criminal charges and be put under arrest to curb his activities. Others who
should be called to account are the aristocrats (a) Rimsky and (b) Korsakov,
**
since if they had not put the finishing touches to this misbegotten opera, it
would never have been staged. I have no more to say!”
Rubin jumped heavily down from the locker. Speech had become a painful
effort to him.
No one was laughing now.
Without waiting to be called, Pryanchikov rose from his chair and spoke to
the hushed room in a low, faltering voice: “Tant pis, gentlemen! Tant pis! Is
this the twentieth century or the Stone Age? What do we mean by treason? In
the age of nuclear fallout! semiconductors! the electronic brain! Who has the
right to judge a fellow man, gentlemen? Who has the right to deprive him of
freedom?”
“Excuse me, have we got to defense counsel’s plea already?” Professor
Chelnov intervened politely, and everybody turned toward him. “I should like
first as supervisory prosecutor to adduce certain facts omitted by my esteemed
colleague, and—”
Nerzhin encouraged him. “Of course, of course, Vladimir Erastovich! We are
always in favor of the prosecution and against the defense, and always
prepared to countenance any breach of judicial procedure. Please go on!”
A restrained smile hovered on Professor Chelnov’s lips. He spoke very
quietly, and if he could be heard easily, it was only because he was listened to
respectfully. His faded eyes seemed to stare at something beyond his audience,
as though the pages of a chronicle were being turned for him. The pom-pom on
his woolen cap made his face seem still sharper and more dubious.
“I wish to point out,” said the professor of mathematics, “that Prince Igor
should have been unmasked before he was appointed commander in the field
and when he first filled in our personal data form. His mother was a
Polovtsian, the daughter of a Polovtsian prince. Himself half Polovtsian by
blood, Prince Igor was allied with the Polovtsians for many years. He had
been ‘an ally true, a trusty friend’ to Konchak before the expedition! In 1180
when he was routed by the sons of Monomakh, he and Khan Konchak fled from
them in the same boat! Later on, Svyatoslav and Ryurik Rostislavich summoned
Igor to join in the great all-Russian expeditions against the Polovtsians, but
Igor declined, making the ‘black ice’ his excuse: ‘Thick was the rime.’
“Perhaps this was because Konchak’s daughter Svoboda was already
betrothed to Igor’s son Vladimir? Finally, who helped Igor to escape in the
year with which we are concerned, 1185? Another Polovtsian.
“The Polovtsian Ovlur, whom Igor then ‘made mighty.’ And Konchak’s
daughter afterward brought Igor his grandson. . . . For suppressing these facts, I
propose that the Author of the Lay also be called to account, together with the
music critic Stasov, who overlooked the treasonable tendencies in Borodin’s
opera, and finally Count Musin-Pushkin, who must surely have had a hand in
the burning of the only manuscript of the lay? It is obvious that someone who
stood to gain by doing so has tried to cover the tracks.”
Chelnov then gave way, indicating that he had concluded.
The same faint smile hovered on his lips.
There was silence.
“Is nobody going to speak for the accused?” Isaak Kagan sounded indignant.
“The man needs a defender!”
“There’s nothing to be said for the rat,” Dvoetyosov shouted. “Put him up
against the wall!”
Sologdin frowned. What Rubin had said was very amusing, and he had still
more respect for Chelnov’s knowledge, but Prince Igor was a representative of
ancient Russian chivalry, of the most glorious period in Russian history, and
should therefore not be made even indirectly a figure of fun. It had left a bad
taste in Sologdin’s mouth.
“No, no, say what you like, I shall speak for the defense.” Isaak, growing
bolder by the minute, craftily surveyed his audience. “Comrade Judges! As an
honorable member of the bar, I fully associate myself with all the arguments of
the state prosecutor.” He spoke with a drawl and slurred his words. “My
conscience tells me that Prince Igor should not only be hanged but quartered as
well. True, capital punishment has not been on our humane statute book for
nearly three years, so we are compelled to find a substitute for it. Nonetheless,
I fail to understand why the prosecutor is so suspiciously softhearted. (It
suggests that he, too, should be looked into!) Why does he miss one gradation
on the penal scale and arrive at twenty-five years’ hard labor? There is, as you
know, a punishment in our Criminal Code only slightly less severe than the
death sentence, a penalty much more fearful than twenty-five years at hard
labor.”
Isaak paused to heighten the effect.
There were cries of “What penalty, Isaak?” The more impatient they were,
the slower he spoke, the more innocent he looked.
“Article 20, subsection A.”
Many of those present were rich in experience of prison, but no one had ever
heard of such an article.
There were shouts of “What’s it say?” and indecent suggestions from around
the room. “Cut his . . . off?”
“Very nearly,” Isaak assented, with a straight face. “To be precise, spiritual
castration. Article 20, subsection A, prescribes as punishment that the criminal
be declared an enemy of the toiling masses and expelled from the USSR! Let
him die like a dog out there in the West! I have no more to say.”
Modestly averting his head, looking smaller and shaggier than ever, he went
back to his bed.
An explosion of laughter shook the room.
“What! What!” Khorobrov roared, choking with laughter, and making his
customer flinch, as the clippers jumped in his hand. “Expulsion? Is there really
such an article?”
There were cries of “Why don’t you ask for a stiffer sentence, then?”
Spiridon smiled a crafty peasant smile.
They all started talking at once and wandering around the room.
By now Rubin was lying on his belly again, trying to make headway with his
Mongolian-Finnish dictionary. He cursed his idiotic habit of showing off. He
was ashamed of the act he had just put on.
His sarcasm was aimed only at unjust judges, but people did not know where
to stop and made fun of the most precious of all things, the idea of socialism
itself.
¶¶¶¶¶ Poem and opera: The poem is The Lay of Igor’s Campaign, the
anonymous Russian epic composed near the end of the twelfth century. The
opera is Alexander Borodin’s Prince Igor, composed in the nineteenth century.
In 1185, Igor Svyatoslavich, Prince of Novgorod-Seversk, led an undermanned
raid against the invading Polovtsians, a nomadic Turkic tribe; he lost and was
captured but later escaped. The famous work inspired other renditions of the
story, including the opera by Borodin. In the present version, told as travesty,
the joke is that Igor is being tried according to the ideological standards of the
Soviet system of justice.
** Rimsky and Korsakov: Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov, a famous nineteenthcentury
Russian composer, joined with Alexander Glazunov to complete
Alexander Borodin’s opera Prince Igor. The joke here is that the speaker
thinks Rimky-Korsakov is two persons.