Chapter-29-The-Lieutenant-Colonel’s-Job

LIEUTENANT COLONEL KLIMENTIEV’S hair was what is called jet black: shiny
black, lying smoothly on his head as though molded to it, divided by a part, and
below his nose was slicked something like a handlebar mustache. He had no
paunch and, at the age of forty-five, held himself like a trim young soldier.
Also, he never smiled on duty, and this made him look darker and more somber
still.
Although it was Sunday, he had arrived even earlier than usual. In the middle
of the recreation period, he crossed the exercise yard, noting at a glance all
that was amiss (without interfering—that was beneath his dignity), and went
into the headquarters of the special prison, ordering Duty Officer Nadelashin
in passing to summon prisoner Nerzhin and come along himself. Crossing the
yard, the lieutenant colonel had taken special note of the way in which, as he
approached, prisoners either tried to walk quickly by or slowed down and
turned away, so as not to come face to face and have to greet him yet again.
Klimentiev observed this coolly and was not offended. He knew that genuine
contempt for his function was not the whole explanation and that fear of
seeming obsequious in the eyes of comrades was more important. Almost
every one of these prisoners, called to his office alone, behaved affably, and
some of them ingratiatingly. There were all sorts of people behind bars, and
some were worth more than others. Klimentiev had realized this long ago. He
respected their right to be proud, and stood fast on his own right to be strict. A
soldier at heart, he had, so he thought, brought into the prison rational military
discipline instead of the sadistic discipline of torturers.
He unlocked his office. It was hot inside, and there was a stifling smell of
paint blistering on the radiators. The lieutenant colonel opened the ventilation
pane, took off his overcoat, sat down, armored in his tunic, and surveyed the
uncluttered surface of his desk. He had not turned over Saturday’s page on his
desk calendar, it had a note saying, “Christmas tree?”
From this half-empty office, in which the “means of production” still
consisted only of a safe containing prison “cases,” half a dozen chairs, a
telephone, and some buzzers, Lieutenant Colonel Klimentiev, without, as far as
could be seen, clutch or driving belts or gears, exercised physical control over
three hundred prisoners’ lives and organized the work of fifty guards.
Though he had come in on Sunday (he would make up for it during the
workweek) and half an hour early, Klimentiev had lost nothing of his
customary coolness and poise.
Junior Lieutenant Nadelashin presented himself apprehensively. A round, red
spot stood out on each cheek. The lieutenant colonel had recorded none of his
numerous sins of omission, but Nadelashin was very much afraid of him. A
comic figure, round-faced and unsoldierly, Nadelashin made a clumsy attempt
to stand at attention.
He reported that everything had been in order during his night duty, there had
been no breaches of regulations, but there had been two unusual incidents, one
of which was dealt with in a report. (He laid it before Klimentiev on a corner
of the desk, but the report immediately took off and corkscrewed to rest under
a distant chair. Nadelashin dived after it and replaced it on the desk.) The
second incident consisted of the summons to the Ministry of State Security of
prisoners Bobynin and Pryanchikov.
The lieutenant colonel knitted his brow and inquired more closely into the
circumstances of the summons and the prisoners’ return. This news was, of
course, disagreeable, indeed alarming. Being commandant of Special Prison
No. 1 meant living on the rim of a volcano, meant always being under the
minister’s eyes. This was no remote lumber camp, where the commandant
could keep a harem and a troupe of clowns and pass sentence like a feudal
lord. Here you had to keep to the letter of the law, take care not to step out of
line, and never give the slightest indication of your own feelings, whether of
anger or compassion. But Klimentiev was like that anyway. He did not think
that Bobynin or Pryanchikov could have found any irregularity in his behavior
to complain of last night. Long experience had taught him not to fear slander
from prisoners. It was colleagues who were likely to slander you.
Then he ran through Nadelashin’s report and saw that the whole thing was
nonsense. That was why he kept Nadelashin on; the man was literate and
sensible.
But he had so many faults! The lieutenant colonel gave him a dressing-down.
He reminded Nadelashin at some length of all the things he had overlooked last
time he had been on duty: The prisoners had been led out to work in the
morning two minutes late, many beds in the cells had been made up hastily, and
Nadelashin had, weakly, failed to recall the careless prisoners from their work
and make them try again. He had been told about all this at the time. But you
could talk as much as you liked to Nadelashin; it was water off a duck’s back.
And just now, at morning exercise? Young Doronin had stood stock-still right
on the boundary line of the exercise area, carefully inspecting the restricted
zone and the space beyond it in the direction of the greenhouses, broken ground
with a gully running across it, which could be very convenient for escapers.
Doronin had a twenty-five-year sentence; he had a history of forging documents
and had eluded a nationwide dragnet for two whole years! Yet not one of the
guard detail had told Doronin to stop dawdling and to circulate. Another thing
—where had Gerasimovich taken his walk? He’d broken away from the rest
and gone off behind the big lime trees in the direction of the engineering shops.
Remember what Gerasimovich was in for! This was his second term, under
Article 58, clauses 1a to 19, i.e., treasonable intent. He hadn’t betrayed his
country, but he had been unable to prove that his reason for going to Leningrad
in the first days of the war was not to be there when the Germans arrived. Had
Nadelashin forgotten that he must study the prisoners continually, both by direct
observation and from their dossiers? Finally, what did Nadelashin think he
looked like? His tunic was not pulled down (Nadelashin pulled it down); the
star on his cap was crooked (Nadelashin straightened it); he saluted like an old
woman. Was it any wonder that, when Nadelashin was duty officer, prisoners
didn’t keep their beds tidy? Unmade beds meant a dangerous crack in prison
discipline. Today they leave their beds untidy, and tomorrow they’ll mutiny and
refuse to go to work!
The lieutenant colonel then went on to give instructions: The guards escorting
prisoners to meet relatives will assemble in the third room for briefing.
Nerzhin is to remain standing in the corridor. You may go.
Nadelashin left the room perspiring. Listening to his superiors, he was
always sincerely distressed by the justice of their reproaches and admonitions
and vowed to offend no more. But once he resumed his routine and bumped
into so many prisoners, each with a will of his own, all pulling different ways,
every one of them wanting some little morsel of freedom, Nadelashin could not
refuse them, hoping that with luck it would pass unnoticed.
Klimentiev picked up his pen and crossed out his “Christmas tree” note. He
had made his decision the day before.
Christmas parties were unknown in special prisons. But this year some
prisoners, and some of the best behaved among them, had begged for
permission to hold one. Klimentiev had started thinking that there was perhaps
no good reason to refuse permission. It could obviously do no harm, and there
wouldn’t be a fire; in matters electrical they were all professors. And it was
very important, on New Year’s Eve, when all the free employees went off to
enjoy themselves in Moscow, to provide some relaxation back at the institute,
too. He knew that the eve of a holiday was particularly hard for prisoners to
bear. Who knows, one of them might decide to do something desperate,
something stupid. So the day before, he had rung the Chief Administration of
Prisons, to which he was directly subordinate, and sought their consent to a
party. Prison regulations forbade musical instruments, but they could find
nothing about seasonal parties and so neither expressly approved nor flatly
forbade it. Long and impeccable service had given Lieutenant Colonel
Klimentiev an infallibly sure touch in all his actions. So on his way home, on
the escalator in the metro, he had reached his decision: All right, then, let them
have their party!
As he entered the compartment, he thought with satisfaction that he was no
mere rubber stamp but an intelligent, efficient, and indeed a kindhearted human
being. Not that the prisoners would ever appreciate it or find out who had
wanted to ban the party and to whom they owed it.
The decision, once made, made Klimentiev feel good. Instead of pushing and
shoving his way into the compartment like the other Muscovites, he stepped in
last just before the doors closed and made no attempt to grab a seat but clasped
a stanchion and watched the blurred reflection of his gallant self in the
mirroring window, beyond which the blackness of the tunnel and the endless
pipes with cable sped past. Then he shifted his gaze to a young woman sitting
near him. She was neatly but inexpensively dressed, in a black artificial
astrakhan coat and a cap of the same material. A bulging briefcase lay on her
knees. Klimentiev looked at her and thought that her face was pleasant but very
tired and that she showed an indifference to her surroundings unusual in a
young woman.
At that moment the woman glanced in his direction, and they looked at each
other for some time without expression, as casual fellow travelers do. But
suddenly the woman started, and Klimentiev glimpsed an anxious question in
her eyes. As his profession required, he had a good memory for faces. He
recognized the woman, and his look betrayed it. She noticed his hesitation and
was obviously confirmed in her own conjecture.
She was the prisoner Nerzhin’s wife, and Klimentiev had seen her on visiting
days at the Taganka Prison.
She frowned, looked away, and glanced again at Klimentiev. He was now
staring out into the tunnel, but out of the corner of his eye he saw her watching
him. Suddenly, she made up her mind, rose, and moved so close to him that he
was compelled to look at her again.
She had gotten up looking determined, but then her courage seemed to fail
her. She had lost the independent air of an emancipated young woman riding in
the metro. It looked as though, in spite of her heavy briefcase, she meant to
give up her seat to the lieutenant colonel. Hers was the heavy lot of all
political prisoners’ wives, wives of “enemies of the people”; wherever they
went, no matter to whom they turned, if their unfortunate marital status became
known, they were branded with their husbands’ indelible shame. In the eyes of
the world such a woman shared the guilt of the double-dyed miscreant to whom
she had rashly entrusted her future. Such women, indeed, often began to feel as
guilty as the “enemies of the people” themselves, whereas their hardened
husbands did not feel guilty at all.
The woman moved very close so that her question could be heard over the
clatter of the train. “Comrade Colonel! Please forgive me! I believe that you
are in charge of my husband? Am I mistaken?”
A great many women of all kinds had risen and stood before Klimentiev in
the long years of his service, and he saw nothing unusual in their anxious
timidity. But here, in the metro, although she had addressed him very
circumspectly, there was something unseemly about the woman standing before
him in supplication with all those eyes upon them.
“Why . . . why are you standing? Sit down, sit down.”
“No, no, that doesn’t matter,” she said, her eyes fixed on the lieutenant
colonel in urgent, almost fanatical entreaty.
“Tell me, please, why I haven’t been allowed a vis . . . why I haven’t been
able to see him for a whole year? When will I be able to? Please tell me.”
Their encounter was as improbable as that of one particular grain of sand
with another forty paces away. A week earlier permission had been received
from the Prisons Administration of the Ministry of State Security for certain
prisoners, among them Nerzhin, to see their wives on Sunday, December 25,
1949, at the Lefortovo Prison. But there was a footnote forbidding notification
of the prisoner Nerzhin’s wife poste restante, as he had requested.
Nerzhin had then been called in and asked for his wife’s real address. He
mumbled that he did not know. Klimentiev, trained by prison regulations never
to tell prisoners the whole truth, did not expect frankness from them. Nerzhin,
of course, knew but wouldn’t say, and it was obvious why he wouldn’t—for
the same reason that the Prisons Administration would not accept poste
restante as an address, because notification was sent by postcard, with the
words “You have been granted permission to visit your husband at such and
such a prison. . . .” Not satisfied with having the wife’s address in its records,
the ministry did its best to reduce the number of candidates for such postcards
by seeing to it that all the neighbors would recognize the wives of enemies of
the people; they must be brought out into the open, isolated, hemmed in by the
right-thinking public. This was what the wives feared. Nerzhin’s wife did not
even use his surname. She was obviously trying to hide from the Ministry of
State Security. So Klimentiev had told Nerzhin that there would of course be
no meeting. And had not notified his wife.
But now the silent attention of all around them was fixed on this woman who
had demeaned herself by rising and standing before him.
“Writing poste restante is forbidden,” he said, just loudly enough for her to
hear above the racket of the train. “You have to give an address.”
Her expression changed rapidly.
“But I’m leaving soon! I’m leaving very soon, and I have no permanent
address now.”
She was obviously lying.
Klimentiev’s intention was to get out at the first stop and, if she followed
him, to explain to her in the entrance hall, where there would be fewer people,
that such discussions could not be permitted outside official premises. The
wife of an enemy of the people seemed in fact to have forgotten her inexpiable
guilt! She looked into the lieutenant colonel’s eyes with a dry, hot, pleading
look, a look inaccessible to reason. Klimentiev was astounded by that look.
What force made her cling so obstinately and hopelessly to a man whom she
didn’t see for years at a time and who could only ruin her whole life?
“It is very, very important to me,” she assured him, wide-eyed, trying to
detect any sign of wavering in Klimentiev’s face.
He remembered a piece of paper lying in the safe at the special prison. That
piece of paper, developing the “Order on the Reinforcement of the Rear,”
aimed a fresh blow at relatives who declined to give addresses. Major Myshin
intended to read this document to the prisoners on Monday. If this woman
didn’t see her husband tomorrow and didn’t give her address, she might never
see him again. Telling her here wouldn’t amount to a formal notification; it
wouldn’t be on record. It might look as if she had turned up at Lefortovo just
on the off chance.
The train was slowing down.
All these thoughts passed quickly through Lieutenant Colonel Klimentiev’s
head. He knew that the prisoner’s worst enemy is the prisoner himself. And
that every woman’s worst enemy is the woman herself. People cannot keep
quiet, even to save their skins. More than once in the course of his career, he
had been foolishly soft, permitted something forbidden, and nobody would
ever have known, except that the very people who had benefited from his
indulgence had thought fit to tell the world about it.
He must not be weak, not this time!
All the same, as the train noise subsided and the colored marble of the
station flashed into view, Klimentiev said to the woman:
“You have been granted permission to visit. Come at ten a.m. tomorrow.” He
did not say “to Lefortovo Prison” because passengers making for the door
were too near.
“Do you know the Lefortovo wall?”
She nodded, overjoyed. “Yes, I do.”
And suddenly her eyes, dry a moment ago, were full of tears.
Anxious to escape those tears, expressions of gratitude, and any other
superfluous talk, Klimentiev stepped out onto the platform to await the next
train.
He was surprised at himself and vexed. He need not have said it.
THE LIEUTENANTCOLONEL kept Nerzhin waiting in the corridor of prison
headquarters because he was an insubordinate prisoner, always the barrackroom
lawyer.
After standing there so long, Nerzhin had indeed not only given up hope of a
visit but, accustomed as he was to all sorts of misfortunes, had begun to expect
some new horror. He was all the more surprised to learn that he would be
going to meet his wife in an hour’s time. The exalted code of conduct that he
constantly inculcated in other prisoners forbade any sign of joy or even
satisfaction. He should have casually inquired exactly when he should be ready
and then left the room. He considered such behavior essential to prevent the
authorities learning too much about the prisoner’s mentality and gauging the
effect on him of their actions. But this was such a sudden reversal of fortune
and his joy was so great that Nerzhin could not help beaming and heartily
thanking the lieutenant colonel.
He, by contrast, did not move a muscle. He went immediately to brief the
guards who would be keeping the prisoners and their visitors company. The
briefing included a reminder of the importance and top-secret status of their
establishment, an explanation that the political offenders going to see relatives
that day were inveterate criminals, and that, when allowed visits, they were
solely and obstinately intent on passing the state secrets to which they had
access directly to the United States of America, through the intermediacy of
their wives. (The guards themselves had not even a rough idea of what was
being developed within the walls of the laboratories, and it was easy to plant
in them a holy dread that a single scrap of paper passed to an outsider might
bring the whole country down in ruins.) Then followed an enumeration of the
main possible places of concealment in clothing and shoes and the techniques
of discovering them, though clothing (respectable, special clothing) was issued
one hour before the visiting time. By means of question and answer, the
lieutenant colonel made quite sure that the instructions on body searches had
been firmly grasped. And in conclusion they studied, with examples, the turns
that conversation between prisoner and visitor might take, practicing listening
in and interrupting all subjects except personal and family matters.
Lieutenant Colonel Klimentiev knew the regulations and was a lover of
order.