Chapter-58-A-Banquet-of-Friends

SEVEN MEN WERE SEATED AROUND a festive table made by pushing three
lockers of different heights together and covering them with a piece of bright
green paper, another prize of war from Lorenz AG. Sologdin and Rubin had
joined Potapov on his bed. Abramson and Kondrashov sat by Pryanchikov, and
the birthday boy had made himself comfortable on the broad windowsill at the
head of the table. Zemelya was already dozing up above, and the other
neighbors were missing. The two double bunks and the space between them,
cut off from the rest of the room, were like a compartment in a train.
Nadya’s pastry straws, a confection never before seen in the sharashka, were
displayed on a plastic dish in the middle of the table, looking comically
inadequate for seven male mouths. Then there was ordinary cake, and cake
smeared with “crème,” dubbed accordingly “patisserie.” There was also
creamy toffee, made by heating an unopened can of condensed milk. Behind
Nerzhin’s back lurked a dark liter jar containing the delectable something or
other for which the wineglasses were intended. It was made from a few drops
of spirits, obtained from the zeks in the chemical laboratory in return for a
piece of “quality” insulating material. This was diluted (four parts water to
one part spirits) and then colored with cocoa concentrate. The result was a
brown liquid of low alcohol content, which was nonetheless impatiently
awaited.
“What do you say, gentlemen?” Sologdin, reclining picturesquely, his eyes
shining even in the half darkness of the closed compartment, had a suggestion:
“Let’s each try and remember when he last sat at a festive board.”
“Yesterday, with the Germans,” Rubin growled. He couldn’t stand
sentimentality.
Sologdin’s occasional use of the word “gentlemen” in company was, Rubin
thought, a sign that twelve years of imprisonment had addled his brain. It was
impossible to believe that any man could pronounce the word seriously thirty-
two years after the Revolution. Sologdin had many other freakish notions,
which could all be explained in the same way. Rubin tried to keep this in mind
and not to flare up even when he found himself listening to something
preposterous.
(Abramson, incidentally, thought Rubin’s partying with the Germans no less
weird. Internationalism was all very well, but there were limits!)
“No, no,” Sologdin persisted, “I mean a real banquet, gentlemen.” He was
glad for any opportunity to use that proud form of address. Since so much more
of the earth’s surface was reserved to the “comrades,” it was Sologdin’s view
that on the cramped islets where prisons stood, those who did not like the
word “gentlemen” must lump it. “The marks of a real banquet are a rich, palecomplexioned
tablecloth, wine in cut-glass decanters, and, needless to say,
elegant women.”
He wanted to go on savoring the feast in anticipation, but Potapov inspected
table and guests with a critical housewife’s eye and interrupted in his grumpy
way. “Listen, boys, before ‘Midnight strikes and the unsleeping watch
descends’ to catch us with this poison, we’d better move on to the official part
of the proceedings.”
He gave Nerzhin the signal to pour.
They were silent, but while the glasses were being filled, memories,
welcome and otherwise, crowded in.
“It’s a long time ago,” Nerzhin sighed.
Potapov came out of his trance: “So long I just can’t remember.”
He had some vague recollection of somebody’s wedding in the midst of a
mad whirl of work before the war, but he could not be sure whether it was his
own or one to which he had been invited.
Pryanchikov woke up. “Well, if you can’t, I can. Avec plaisir. Let me tell you
about it. In Paris in 1945, I was—”
Potapov stopped him.
“Wait a bit, Valentulya. Let’s just—”
“To the friend in whose honor we are gathered here!” Kondrashov-Ivanov
pronounced the toast more loudly than was necessary, drawing himself up still
straighter. “May he be—”
But before the guests could reach for their glasses, Nerzhin raised himself
slightly from the sill—there was barely room for him by the window—and
said quietly, “My friends! Forgive this departure from tradition, but. . . .”
He took a deep breath; he was agitated. The warmth beamed on him from
seven pairs of eyes had forged some purpose within him.
“Let us be fair! Not everything in our lives is black! We have, for instance,
this form of happiness, the ease and freedom of high school conviviality; we
can exchange thoughts freely, without fear or concealment. Were we so
fortunate when we were free?”
“Well, we weren’t free all that often,” Abramson said with a laugh.
Childhood apart, he had spent less than half his life at liberty.
“Friends!” Nerzhin warmed to his theme. “I’m thirty-one years old. Life has
pampered me at times and plunged me into the depths at others. In accordance
with the law of sinusoidal motion, there may yet be sudden surges of hollow
success and false greatness ahead of me. But I swear to you that I shall never
forget that true human greatness that I have come to know in prison! I am proud
that my modest anniversary today has brought together such a select company.
Let’s not embarrass ourselves with pompous speeches. Let’s drink to the
friendship that flourishes in prison vaults!”
Paper cups soundlessly bumped glass and plastic. Potapov smiled
apologetically, straightened his primitive spectacles, and, carefully spacing his
words, recited:
The sons of this illustrious clan,
Keen rhetoricians to a man
In anxious Nikita’s house assembled,
Or where discreet Ilya dissembled.
They drank the brown beverage slowly, trying to define its bouquet.
“It’s got a bit of a kick, anyway,” Rubin said approvingly. “Bravo,
Andreich.”
“It certainly has,” Sologdin agreed. He was in a mood to praise anything
today.
Nerzhin laughed. “A very rare occurrence! Lev and Mitya actually agree
about something! I don’t remember it happening before!”
“Oh yes you do.”
“No, Gleb my friend. Don’t you remember Lev and me agreeing around New
Year’s sometime that an unfaithful wife can’t be forgiven but an unfaithful
husband can?”
Abramson laughed wearily: “Good heavens, what male wouldn’t say yes to
that?”
“Well, that specimen over there”—Rubin pointed at Nerzhin—“maintained at
the time that a woman could also be forgiven, that there was no difference.”
“You really said that?” Kondrashov asked quickly.
Pryanchikov’s laugh rang out. “What a nut! There’s an enormous difference!”
“The very structure of the body and the means of coupling show that there is
an immense difference!” Sologdin exclaimed.
“No, it goes deeper than that,” Rubin protested. “It’s part of nature’s grand
design. A man is more or less indifferent to quality in women but has an
instinctive appetite for quantity. Thanks to that, few women are completely
overlooked.”
Sologdin raised his hand in a graceful gesture of acknowledgment. “Hence,”
he said, “the charitable character of Don Juanism.”
“Well, then, women hanker after quality, if you want to put it that way.”
Kondrashov wagged a long finger. “Their unfaithfulness is a quest for quality!
That way their progeny is improved!”
Nerzhin defended himself. “Don’t blame me, friends! Look, when I was
growing up there were red banners flapping overhead, with ‘Equality’ in
golden letters! ‘Equality.’ Since when, of course—”
“Oh no, not equality again!” Sologdin growled.
“What have you got against equality?” Abramson looked indignant.
“Nothing, except that it doesn’t exist in the natural world! People are not
‘born equal’; that’s a myth invented by those idiots . . . those . . . those know-italls”
(you had to guess that he meant the Encyclopedists). “They had not the
least understanding of heredity. People are born unequal spiritually, unequal in
willpower, unequal in ability.”
“Unequal in possessions, unequal in social status.” Abramson took up the
tale, mimicking Sologdin.
“Well, where did you ever see equality of possessions? Where did you ever
manage to create it?” Sologdin was getting heated. “There never was such a
thing, and there never will be! It’s unattainable except by beggars and saints!”
Nerzhin interrupted before the argument could become a quarrel.
“Since then, life has hammered a bit more sense into my stupid head, of
course, but in those days I thought if nations are equal and human beings are
equal, surely men and women must also be equal. In all respects.”
“Nobody’s blaming you!” Kondrashov’s eyes were as emphatic as his
words. “Don’t give in too soon!”
“These delusions of yours are pardonable only on account of your youth,”
Sologdin ruled. (He was six years older.)
“Theoretically Gleb is right,” Rubin said hesitantly. “I’m ready to break a
hundred thousand lances myself for the equality of men and women. But
embrace my wife after somebody else has embraced her? Br-r-r! It’s a
biological impossibility!”
“If you ask me, gentlemen, it’s ridiculous even talking about it,” Pryanchikov
piped, but as usual he wasn’t allowed to have his say.
“There’s a simple solution, Lev Grigorievich,” Potapov said firmly. “You
yourself mustn’t embrace anyone except your wife!”
“Well, you know how it is. . . .” Rubin made a gesture of helplessness, and a
broad smile lost itself in his piratical beard.
The door opened noisily, and somebody came in. Potapov and Abramson
looked around. No, it wasn’t the guard.
“What about it—delenda est Carthago?” Abramson nodded toward the liter
jar.
“The sooner the better. Who needs a spell in solitary? Come on Vikentich,
pour!”
Nerzhin poured out what was left, scrupulously ensuring that the shares were
equal.
“Maybe you’ll allow us to drink a birthday toast now?” Abramson asked.
“No, brothers. As it’s my birthday, I shall claim one privilege—to break with
tradition. . . . I saw my wife today. And in her I saw all our tormented,
terrorized, and persecuted wives. We put up with our lot because there’s no
escape. But what about them? Let’s drink to those who have voluntarily
shackled themselves—”
“Yes! To those heroines!” Kondrashov-Ivanov exclaimed.
They drank.
And were silent for a while.
“Look at the snow!” Potapov remarked.
They all looked round. Behind Nerzhin, beyond the misted windows, the
snow itself could not be seen, but they glimpsed a flurry of black shadows of
snowflakes cast on the prison windows by the lamps and searchlights in the
grounds.
Somewhere beyond the curtain of that copious snowfall, there were people,
and Nadya Nerzhina was one of them.
“We’re even fated to see the snow as black, not white,” Kondrashov
exclaimed.
“We’ve drunk to friendship. We’ve drunk to love! These are fine things,
timeless things,” Rubin said.
“As far as love is concerned, I never had any doubt about it. But to tell the
truth, before I served at the front and then landed in prison, I didn’t believe in
friendship, especially the sort that . . . you know, that makes you ‘lay down
your life for a friend.’ In the normal course of things, a man has his family, and
that leaves him no room for friendship. Am I right?”
“That’s a view widely held,” Abramson replied. “There’s a song you often
hear played by request on the radio: ‘I tread the valley’s even path.’Just pay
attention to the words! It’s one long nauseating whine, the self-pitying moan of
a mean spirit:
Friends are friends, and comrades faithful
Only till the dark days come.”
The artist was outraged. “It wouldn’t be worth living a single day longer if
you thought like that. Might as well hang yourself!”
“It’s just the opposite, really. Friendship begins when the dark days come.”
“Who wrote it anyway?”
“Merzlyakov.”
“What a name! Who’s Merzlyakov, Lev, old man?”
“Poet. Born twenty years before Pushkin.”
“You know his biography, of course?”
“Professor at Moscow University. Translated Tasso.”
“Is there anything Lev doesn’t know? Except higher mathematics?”
“Yes, elementary mathematics.”
“He keeps on saying, ‘Let’s open the brackets,’ and he thinks the square of a
negative number is negative.”
Pryanchikov butted in, sputtering in his eagerness to be heard, like a child at
table with adults. “Gentlemen. I feel bound to show you that Merzlyakov was
sometimes right!”
He was in no way inferior to his companions; he had a quick mind, was witty
and engagingly frank. But he lacked the self-control and composure of a grown
man, so that he seemed fifteen years younger than they were, and they treated
him like an adolescent.
“It’s a proven fact: The man who eats out of the same dish is the one who
betrays you! I had a close friend; he and I escaped from a Nazi concentration
camp and hid from search parties together. Later on, I got into the family of a
big businessman, and he was introduced to a French countess. . . .”
“Really?” said Sologdin, impressed. Titles like “count” and “prince” still
held an irresistible charm for him.
“There’s nothing surprising in that. Some Russian prisoners of war even
married marchionesses!”
“You don’t say!”
“Well, when Colonel General Golikov began his repatriation swindle, I
wouldn’t go, of course; in fact, I did my best to talk the other Russian idiots out
of it, and suddenly I met this best friend of mine. And just imagine, he was the
one who betrayed me! gave me up to the Geebees!”
††††††
“What a wicked thing!” the artist exclaimed.
“Let me tell you how it was.”
They were nearly all listening to Pryanchikov’s story now. But Sologdin
wanted to know how POWs came to marry countesses.
To Rubin it was quite clear that the jolly and amiable Valentulya, with whom
it was perfectly possible to be friendly in the sharashka, had, looked at
objectively, been a reactionary figure in Western Europe in 1945, and that what
he called treachery on the part of a friend (meaning that the friend had assisted
Pryanchikov to return involuntarily to his native land) was not treachery but the
friend’s patriotic duty.
One story led to another. Potapov remembered the booklet that was handed to
every repatriate, “The Motherland Forgives, The Motherland Calls.” It said in
black and white that the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet had ruled against the
prosecution even of repatriates who had served in the German police. These
elegantly produced, profusely illustrated booklets, with their nebulous hints at
unspecified adjustments to the collective farm system and the social order in
the Soviet Union, were confiscated during the search at the frontier, while the
repatriates themselves were put into prison trucks and dispatched to
counterespionage headquarters. Potapov had read one of these booklets with
his own eyes, and although it had nothing to do with his own decision to return,
he found this dirty little trick on the part of an enormous state peculiarly
distressing.
Abramson was dozing behind his staring glasses. He had known that there
would be all this silly talk. How else could the regime have rounded up that
mob?
Rubin and Nerzhin had both spent the first year after the war in
counterespionage depots and jails immersed in the stream of POWs flowing in
from Europe. They felt as if they had themselves endured four excruciating
years in captivity, and they were no longer particularly interested in the stories
of repatriates. Instead, they joined in persuading Kondrashov to talk about art.
Rubin regarded Kondrashov as a mediocre artist and not very serious person
whose views were divorced from economic and historical reality. Yet
whenever they conversed, without realizing it himself, Rubin drank in the
artist’s words like living water.
Art, to Kondrashov, was not just an occupation or a branch of knowledge. It
was the only possible way of life. All that he saw around him—landscapes,
objects, people, colors—evoked one of the twenty-four tonalities. (Rubin was
labeled “C minor.”) All that he heard or felt—a human voice, the mood of a
moment, a novel, a tonality—had a color, and Kondrashov could tell you
without hesitation what it was (the key of F-sharp major was dark blue and
gold).
There was one state of mind Kondrashov had never experienced—
indifference. He made no secret of his immoderate likes and dislikes. He was
famous for his uncompromising judgments. He was a devotee of Rembrandt
and a debunker of Raphael. An admirer of Valentin Serov and fiercely hostile
to the Itinerant School. He was incapable of qualified approval; for him there
was no midpoint between boundless enthusiasm and boundless indignation. He
could not stand Chekhov. He was repelled by Tchaikovsky (“He suffocates me!
He robs me of hope and the will to live!”) but felt such an affinity with Bach’s
chorales and Beethoven’s concertos that he might have composed them himself.
“Must pictures be true to nature?” was the subject for discussion this time.
“Well, suppose you want to depict a window opening onto a garden on a
summer morning,” Kondrashov said. His voice was youthful, with an
occasional shrill note when he was excited. If you closed your eyes, you might
think you were listening to an adolescent arguing.
“If you faithfully copy nature, if you depict it all just as you see it, will it
really be all? What about the singing of the birds? The freshness of the
morning? The purity of the scene? While you are painting, you are aware of
these things; they enter into your experience of the summer morning. But how
are you to preserve them in the picture? How can you avoid denying them to
the viewer? Obviously you have to find some substitute for them, using the only
resources you have, color and composition.”
“So you can’t just copy?”
“Of course not! And anyway”—Kondrashov was beginning to get carried
away—“you begin every landscape, and every portrait, by admiring nature and
thinking, how marvelous! how fine! if only I could show it just like that, just as
it is! But you get deeper into your work, and suddenly you realize. . . . Just a
minute! Hang on! So much for nature! This is simply absurd, just nonsense,
completely incongruous! Look here, for instance! And here! It ought to be like
this! And like that! That’s how you paint!” Kondrashov looked triumphantly
and challengingly at his companions.
“Yes, but ‘ought to be’ takes you down a very dangerous road, old man!”
Rubin protested. “You’ll find yourself making angels and devils out of fleshand-blood
people, which, in fact, is just what you do. Say what you like, if you
paint a portrait of Andrei Andreich Potapov, it ought to be Potapov.”
“But what does portraying him as he really is mean?” Kondrashov protested.
“There must of course be an external resemblance—same facial proportions,
same shape eyes, same color hair. But isn’t it rather rash to suppose that we
can see reality just as it is? Especially spiritual reality? Who can see that or
know it? And if I look at a sitter and discern in him qualities finer than those he
has so far revealed, why shouldn’t I make so bold as to depict them? Help the
man find himself and rise to higher things?”
Nerzhin clapped his hands. “Why, you’re a one hundred percent socialist
realist. The deputy minister doesn’t know what a treasure he has in you!”
“Why should I undervalue his soul?” Kondrashov’s glasses, immovably fixed
to his nose, flashed angrily in the half darkness. “Let me tell you, the most
important thing about portrait painting, and indeed about all relationships, is
that whatever one person sees and identifies in another is evoked and activated
in that other person! Understand?”
“In short,” Rubin said dismissively, “objectivity means nothing to you, in this
as in other things.”
“Yes, indeed! I’m unobjective and proud of it!” Kondrashov thundered.
Rubin was taken aback. “Eh? eh? What’s that you say?”
“You heard! I’m proud of being unobjective!” Kondrashov’s words were like
the blows he might have struck if the upper bunk had not cramped his swing.
“What about you, Lev Grigorievich? What about you? You are unobjective,
too, but consider yourself objective, and that’s much worse! That’s where I’m
superior; I’m unobjective, and I know it! I take credit for it! That’s the essential
me!”
“Not objective? Me?” Rubin seemed astonished. “If I’m not objective, who
on earth is?”
“Nobody!” the artist cried exultantly. “Nobody at all! Nobody ever was, and
nobody ever will be! In fact, every cognitive act has an emotional coloring, has
it not? The truth that is destined to be the end result of long inquiries is surely
dimly present in our minds before our inquiries even begin! We pick up a book
feeling a vague antipathy for the author, we foresee before we have read the
first page that we will pretty certainly not like it, and of course we don’t!
You’ve embarked on a comparison of a hundred of the world’s languages,
you’ve only just finished lining up your dictionaries, there’s forty years of
work ahead of you, but you’re already sure that you’ll succeed in proving that
all words derive from a word for ‘hand’! Do you call that objectivity?”
Nerzhin, highly gratified, roared with laughter at Rubin. Rubin laughed, too
—how could anyone be angry with this holy innocent!
Kondrashov had not mentioned politics, but Nerzhin was quick to do so.
“Go one step further, Ippolit Mikhalych! Just one, I beg you! What about
Marx? I feel sure that before he had begun his economic analyses or compiled
any statistical tables, he knew in advance that under capitalism the working
class faces absolute impoverishment, that it is the best part of mankind, and
hence that the future belongs to it. Hand on heart, Lev, isn’t that the truth?”
Rubin sighed. “My dear friend . . . if we could never foresee what we were
going to find. . . .”
“You see, Ippolit Mikhalych! And that is what they base this ‘progress’ of
theirs on! How I hate that meaningless word ‘progress’!”
“Well, in art there is no ‘progress’! There can be none!”
Nerzhin was delighted. “No, indeed! Indeed there isn’t! That’s what’s so
good about it! The seventeenth century had Rembrandt, and Rembrandt’s still
here—just try and go one better today! Whereas seventeenth-century
technology seems primitive to us now. Or think of the great inventions of the
eighteen seventies. To us they look like children’s toys. Yet those were the
years in which Anna Karenina was written. If you know of anything finer, I
would like to hear about it!”
Rubin seized his opening.
“Hold on, there, maestro. You do at least leave us with some progress in
engineering? You don’t call that meaningless.”
“Anyway, Gleb Vikentich,” Abramson put in, “your argument can be turned
inside out. It can be taken to mean that scientists and engineers have done great
things over the centuries and made progress, while the art snobs have
obviously just been playing the fool. Parasites. . . .”
“In it for the money!” Sologdin exclaimed. He seemed pleased about it.
He and Abramson, poles apart, were allies for the space of a single thought.
Pryanchikov applauded.
“Bravo! Bravo! Well done, boys! That’s just what I was trying to tell you
yesterday in the Acoustics Lab!” (He had been talking about the superior
merits of jazz, but it seemed to him now that Abramson was expressing his
own thoughts for him.)
“I think I can make peace between you!” Potapov laughed knowingly. “There
has been in the course of this century one historically well-attested occasion on
which a certain electrical engineer and a certain mathematician, painfully
aware of a lacuna in the belles-lettres of their fatherland, jointly composed a
short piece of fine writing. Alas, it was never written down; they had no
pencil.”
“Andreich!” cried Nerzhin. “Couldn’t you reconstruct it?”
“With a bit of a struggle and your help. It was my one and only opus. So I
ought to be able to remember it.”
“Gentlemen, this is going to be fun!”
Sologdin brightened and settled himself more comfortably. Jeux d’esprit of
this sort were the thing he really enjoyed in prison.
“But you surely realize that, as Lev Grigorievich teaches us, no work of art
can be understood unless we know the history of its creation and the social
requirement it meets.”
“You’re improving, Andreich.”
“So, dear guests, eat up the cake that was made for you. The story of its
creation is as follows: In the summer of the year one thousand nine hundred
and forty-six, in a hideously overcrowded cell in the nursing home called BuTyur—the
administration had stamped that inscription, meaning Butyrskaya
Tyurma, Butyrki Prison, on the crockery— Gleb and I were lying side by side
under the bed planks to begin with, then on the bed planks, gasping for air,
groaning from hunger, and we had nothing to occupy ourselves with except
light conversation and observation of behavior. . . . I’m not sure which of us
said it first. What if. . . ?”
“You did, Andreich. You said, ‘What if. . . ?’ In any case, the key image from
which the piece takes its title certainly belongs to you. . . .”
“Well, Gleb and I asked ourselves . . . what if . . . what if suddenly into our
cell. . . .”
“Don’t tease! What did you call it?”
“All right, all right, let’s try and remember that ancient tale between us, shall
we?” Potapov’s voice, cracked and muffled, was like that of an inveterate
devourer of dusty folios. “Its title was ‘The Buddha’s Smile.’ ”
†††††† Geebees: A version of gebisty, a slang term for the MGB, the Ministry
of State Security.