Chapter-82-Indoctrination-in-Optimism

MAJOR MYSHIN’S WORK DIFFERED in scope and character from that of Major
Shikin. It had its own pluses and minuses. Its main privilege was that he read
prisoners’ letters and decided whether to send them on. Its disadvantages were
that the relegation of prisoners to camps, withholding their wages, allocating
them to nutritional categories, determining the frequency of their relatives’
visits, and a variety of other routine harassments were not in Myshin’s hands.
He found much to envy in the rival organization of Major Shikin, who was
always the first to hear news even from inside the prison. And so he attached
all the more importance to proctoring the prison yard through his net curtains.
(Shikin was denied this resource: His window, unfortunately, was on the third
floor.) Observation of prisoners’ habitual behavior also supplied Myshin with
additional material. From his lookout he supplemented reports received from
informants, saw who walked with whom and whether their conversation was
animated or casual. Later on, when handing over or accepting a letter, he liked
to catch a man off guard with a sudden question: “Incidentally, what were you
talking to Petrov about during the lunch break yesterday?”
In this way he sometimes obtained quite useful information from a
flummoxed prisoner.
During today’s lunch break, Myshin ordered the next zek on his list to wait a
few minutes and cast an eye over the courtyard. (He did not, however, see the
stoolie hunt in progress at the far end of the building.)
At 3:00 p.m. the lunch break was over. The officious sergeant major
dismissed those who had not been interviewed and was ordered to admit
Dyrsin.
Ivan Feofanovich Dyrsin was endowed by nature with high cheekbones,
sunken cheeks, thick speech, and a comic surname. He had been recruited by
the institute via a night school for workers, where he had been a diligent and
modestly successful pupil. He had talent but no skill in advertising it, so that he
had been underrated and sold short all his life. Nowadays, everybody who felt
like it in Number Seven took advantage of him. As his “tenner” neared its end,
he was more afraid than ever of the powers that be. He dreaded, above all,
being resentenced. He had seen many cases of that in the war years.
His original conviction was itself an absurdity. He had been jailed early in
the war for “anti-Soviet agitation,” denounced by neighbors who coveted his
apartment (and subsequently obtained it). It became clear that he had engaged
in no such agitation—ah, but he might have done so, since he listened to
German radio. He had in fact never listened to German radio—but he might
have done so, since he had an illegal German radio in the house. In fact, he had
no such radio—but he might very well have had one, since he was a radio
engineer, and information received led to the discovery of a box containing
two valves in his apartment.
Dyrsin had had more than his fill of wartime prison camps, the sort in which
people ate unripe grain stolen from the horses and the sort in which they mixed
flour with snow under a sign reading “Camp Site” nailed to a pine tree on the
fringe of the taiga. During Dyrsin’s eight years in the land of the Gulag, his
wife became a haggard old woman and their two children died. Then
somebody suddenly remembered that he was an engineer. They brought him to
Marfino, fed him the best butter, and gave him a hundred rubles a month to send
home to his wife.
Now, for some unknown reason, he was no longer getting letters. Perhaps his
wife was dead.
Major Myshin sat with his clasped hands resting on the desk. There were no
papers on the desk, the inkwell was closed, his pen was dry, and his overripe,
mauve-complexioned face was, as ever, expressionless. His brow was so
fleshy that no wrinkle, whether of age or thought, could ever disturb its
smoothness. His cheeks, too, were fleshy. Myshin’s face was that of a terra
cotta idol. Pink and purple dyes had been mixed into the clay before it was
baked. His eyes were professionally lifeless, expressionless, with that special
arrogant blankness that remains with such people even in retirement.
Something unprecedented happened: Myshin told Dyrsin to take a seat!
(Dyrsin started wondering what calamity was in store for him, and what would
be on the charge sheet.) After the brief silence prescribed by the manual,
Myshin said, “You’re forever complaining. That’s all you ever do—complain.
Telling people you’ve had no letters for two months.”
“It’s more than three, Citizen Major,” Dyrsin timidly reminded him.
“Three, then; what’s the difference? But have you ever asked yourself what
sort of person your wife is?”
Myshin spoke unhurriedly, pronouncing each word distinctly and pausing
between sentences.
“. . . What sort of person your wife is. Eh?”
“I don’t understand,” Dyrsin stammered.
“What d’you mean, don’t understand? What’s her political profile like?”
Dyrsin turned pale. He had thought that he was prepared for anything, inured
to everything. He wasn’t.
He said a silent prayer for his wife. (He had learned to pray in the camp.)
“She’s a whiner, and we don’t need whiners,” the major explained firmly.
“And she suffers from a peculiar form of blindness: She doesn’t see the good
things in our life, and she emphasizes only what is bad.”
“For God’s sake! Tell me what’s happened to her!” Dyrsin implored him,
shaking his head violently.
“To her?” Myshin said, with a still-longer pause for emphasis. “To her?
Nothing.” (Dyrsin breathed again). “As yet.”
In no hurry at all, he took a letter from a drawer and passed it to Dyrsin.
“Thank you!” Dyrsin gasped. “Can I go now?”
“No. Read it here. I can’t let you take it to your quarters. What idea of life
outside would prisoners get from letters like that? Read it.”
He froze. A mauve idol. Fit to bear all the burdens of his office.
Dyrsin drew the letter from its envelope. He noticed nothing special about it,
but it might have made an unfavorable impression on anyone else, seeming to
mirror the woman who had written it. It was on coarse paper, like wrapping
paper, and every line she had written buckled and drooped toward the righthand
edge of the page.
The letter, dated September 18, read as follows:
Dear Vanya,
I’m sitting here writing, but I really want to sleep, and I can’t. I come
home from work and go straight into the garden to dig potatoes with
Manyushka. They’ve turned out small. I didn’t go anywhere on vacation;
I didn’t have anything to go in; everything is in rags. I wanted to save a
bit of money to come and see you, but it never works out. Nika came to
see you that time, and they told her there’s no such person here, and her
mother and father told her of , they said why did you go; now they’ll
have you on the list and be watching you. Altogether, relations with them
are pretty strained, and they aren’t talking to L.V. at all.
Things are bad with us. Granny has been in bed over two years now;
she doesn’t get up; she’s just skin and bones; she doesn’t look like she’s
dying; but she doesn’t get any better; she’s worn us all out. There’s a
horrible smell because of Granny, and there are quarrels all the time.
I’m not on speaking terms with L.V.; Manyushka has broken up with her
husband; her health is poor; her children won’t do what she tells them;
when we get home from work, it’s terrible, everybody cursing everybody
else. Where can I escape to? When will it all end?
Anyway, a big kiss from me. Keep well.
She hadn’t even signed it or written “Yours.”
Waiting patiently until Dyrsin had read and reread the letter, Major Myshin
set his white eyebrows and mauve lips in motion and said, “I didn’t give you
that letter when it arrived. I realized that it was just the mood of a moment, and
you need to be in good spirits for your work. I was waiting for her to send a
good letter. But look what she sent last month.”
Dyrsin looked up sharply but said nothing. Pain, not reproach, showed on his
unprepossessing face. He took the second opened envelope with trembling
fingers and drew out a letter written in the same broken-backed, erratic lines,
but this time on a page from an exercise notebook.
October 30
Dear Vanya!
You are of ended because I don’t write more often, but I get home from
work late and go nearly every day into the forest for sticks, and by then
it’s evening. I’m so tired I’m ready to drop; I sleep badly at night;
Granny keeps me awake. I get up early, five in the morning, and I have to
be at work by eight. It’s a warm autumn still, thank God, but winter will
soon be upon us! You can’t get coal at the depot; you have to be
important or know somebody. Not long ago my bundle fell of my back,
and I just dragged it along the ground after me, I hadn’t the strength to
pick it up, and I thought, “I’m an old woman, and here I am hauling a
load of brushwood!” I’ve got a rupture in my groin from the weight. Nika
came home for the holidays; she’s gotten quite nice looking, but she
didn’t even call on us. I can’t think of you without hurting. I have nobody
to turn to. I shall go on working as long as I have the strength, but I’m
afraid I may get bedridden like Granny. Granny has lost the use of her
legs; she’s all swollen; she can’t lie down or get up without help. And
they don’t take people that ill in the hospital; it doesn’t pay them. L.V.
and I have to lift her up every time. She does it under herself; the place
stinks horribly; this is no life; it’s forced labor. She can’t help it, of
course, but I can’t stand any more of it. In spite of your advice not to
swear at each other, we do it every day; all you ever hear from L.V. is
“bastard” and “shitbag.” And Manyushka swears at her children. You
don’t think ours would have grown up like that, do you? You know, I often
feel glad they aren’t here anymore. Little Valery started school this year;
he needs lots of things, but there’s no money. Except that Mania gets
maintenance from Pavel, through the court. Well, there’s nothing more to
write for now. Look after yourself. I kiss you.
It wouldn’t be so bad if I could get a good sleep on holidays. But you
have to drag yourself to the demonstration.
Dyrsin was stunned by this letter. He put his hand to his cheek as though he
was trying to wash it and could not.
“Well? Have you read it, or haven’t you? You don’t seem to be reading.
Come on, you’re a grown man. Literate. You’ve done time. You know what to
think of that letter. During the war they locked people up for letters like that. A
demonstration is an occasion everybody enjoys, and she talks about dragging
herself there. Coal? Coal isn’t just for important people; it’s for all citizens;
you just have to take your turn, of course. Well, I was of two minds whether or
not to give you letter number two, but now we’ve got number three, and it’s
just like the others. I’ve given it a lot of thought and decided it’s got to stop.
You’ve got to stop it yourself. Write her something . . . you know, optimistic
sounding, positive, something to keep the woman’s spirits up. Make her see
that she mustn’t complain, that it’ll all come right in the end. Anyway, they’re a
lot better off than they were; they’ve inherited some money. Read this.”
The letters were coming in chronological order. Number three was dated
December 8.
Dear Vanya,
I’ve got sad news for you. Granny died on November 26, 1949, at
12:05 p.m. When she died, we didn’t have a single kopeck, but Misha,
bless him, gave us two hundred rubles; it didn’t cost a lot, but of course
it was a pauper’s funeral, no priest and no music; they simply took the
cof in to the cemetery on a cart and tipped it in the hole. It’s a bit quieter
in the house now, but it seems sort of empty. I’m poorly myself; I get in a
terrible sweat at night; pillow and sheet are wet through. A gypsy woman
has prophesied that I will die this winter, and it will be a happy release
from a life like this. L.V. probably has TB; she coughs and even spits
blood; as soon as she gets home from work she starts cursing and
swearing; she’s as bad-tempered as an old witch. She and Manyushka
are getting me down. I seem to have all the bad luck; I’ve got another
four bad teeth, and two have fallen out already, I need dentures, but
there’s no money for that either, and anyway there’s a waiting list.
The three hundred rubles you were paid for three months’ work came
just in time; we were freezing. Our turn at the depot came up (No. 4576),
but they only give you coal dust; it isn’t worth bringing back. Manyushka
added two hundred of her own to your three hundred, and we paid a
driver to bring us lump coal. Our potatoes won’t last till spring—just
imagine, two gardens, and nothing to dig up; there was no rain and the
crop failed.
The children are nothing but trouble. Valery gets bad marks and hangs
out somewhere after school. The headmaster sent for Manyushka and
said what sort of mother are you that you can’t manage your children.
And Zhenka, he’s only six, but they both use filthy language; they’re just
lowlifes, the pair of them. I spend all my money on them, and the other
day Valery called me a bitch; if that’s what you get from a nasty little
kid, what will they be like when they grow up? We can pick up our
inheritance next May, they say, but it will cost us two thousand, and
where can we get that from? Elena and Misha are bringing a court case;
they want to take L.V.’s room away from her. When Granny was alive, she
just wouldn’t say who should get what, however many times we told her.
Misha and Elena are also poorly.
I wrote to you last autumn, twice in fact, if I remember rightly; aren’t
you getting my letters? Where do they go astray?
I’m sending you a forty-kopeck stamp. What’s the news there? Are they
going to release you, or aren’t they?
There’s some very beautiful kitchenware on sale in the shop, aluminum
saucepans and bowls.
A big kiss from me.
Keep well.
A spot of moisture had run across the paper, blurring the ink.
Once again it was difficult to tell whether Dyrsin was still reading or had
finished.
“Well, do you see what I mean?”
Dyrsin did not stir.
“Write a reply. A cheerful reply. I’ll allow you four pages or a bit more. You
once wrote to her that she should trust in God. Well, that’s better than nothing, I
suppose. Reassure her; tell her you’ll soon be back. Tell her you’ll be getting a
big wage.”
“But will I really be allowed to go home? Not banished?”
“That’s for higher authority to decide. But keeping your wife’s spirits up is
your duty. She’s your life companion, after all.”
The major was silent for a while.
“Or maybe you’d like somebody a bit younger now?” he suggested
understandingly.
He would not have been sitting there so calmly if he had known that his
favorite informer, Siromakha, was cooling his heels in the hallway, consumed
with impatience to see him.