Chapter-79-The-Decision-Explained

ENGINEER COLONEL YAKONOV was in his office with Major Shikin.
They sat conversing man-to-man, though they despised and detested each
other.
Yakonov liked using the words “We in the Cheka” at meetings. But to Shikin
he was what he had always been, an enemy of the people who had traveled
abroad, served a sentence, been pardoned, and even taken to the bosom of the
Security Service, but was nonetheless not not guilty. The day must inevitably
come when the Organs would unmask Yakonov and arrest him again. Shikin
would be delighted to rip off those epaulets with his own hands! The diligent
major with the head too big for his body was irked by the engineer colonel’s
extravagant condescension and the lordly self-assurance with which he bore
the burden of authority. Shikin, accordingly, always did his best to emphasize
his own importance and that of the operations which the engineer colonel
undervalued.
On this occasion, he was suggesting that at the next general conference on
“vigilance” Yakonov should report on security arrangements in the institute,
severely criticizing their laxity. The conference could advantageously coincide
with the relegation of unconscientious zeks to the camps and the introduction of
the new secret logbooks.
Engineer Colonel Yakonov felt exhausted after yesterday’s attack. There
were dark pouches under his eyes, but his features had not lost their pleasing
fullness. He nodded agreement as the other man spoke, but deep inside, behind
all the barriers that no eye, except perhaps that of his wife, ever penetrated, he
was thinking that this hoary-headed major, who had gone gray poring over
reports by stoolies, was an obscene bug, that his activities were idiotically
futile and his proposals invariably cretinous.
Yakonov had been given a single month. In a month’s time his head might be
on the block. He had to struggle out of the armor of command, break out of the
shell of seniority, settle down in a quiet place with the plans before him, and
think for himself.
But the outsize leather chair in which he sat was negation enough; the
engineer colonel must answer for everything but could take a hand in nothing.
All he could do was pick up the receiver and sign papers.
Then again, all that petty squabbling with Roitman’s group was taking too
much out of him. It was a war he waged because he was forced to. It was not in
his power to squeeze them out of the institute. He just wanted to enforce
unquestioning obedience. Whereas they wanted to drive him out and were
indeed capable of destroying him.
Shikin was speaking. Yakonov’s gaze narrowly avoided him. His eyes were
open, but mentally he had left behind the pudgy body in a tunic and made his
way home.
Home! My home is my castle! How wise the English are, the first to realize
that truth. On your own little territory, only your own laws apply. Four walls
and a roof reliably separate you from your beloved fatherland. Your wife’s
gently smiling eyes greet you on your threshold. The merry chatter of little girls
(alas, already fodder for a school that was itself like a stultifying government
department) soothes and amuses you, wearied and badgered and harassed as
you are. Your wife has already taught them both to prattle in English. She sits
down at the piano and plays a tuneful Waldteufel waltz. Dinnertime and the
after-dinner hours soon pass, you are on the threshold of night, but your house
is free from pompous high-ranking idiots and spitefully captious young men.
His working day comprised so much that was painful, so many humiliations,
such desperate feats of self-control, so much administrative hustle that
Yakonov had begun to feel his age, and if only he could, he would gladly have
sacrificed his job and stayed at home, in his own cozy little world.
Not that he was no longer interested in the world outside. He took a very
lively interest in it. It would, he thought, be difficult to find in the history of the
world a time more fascinating than our own. World politics was to him a game
of chess played on a hundred boards simultaneously. But he had no wish to be
a player, still less a pawn, the head of a pawn, the base of a pawn. . . . His
ambition was to be a mere spectator, to savor the game at ease in his pajamas
and old-fashioned rocking chair in a book-lined room.
Yakonov was fully equipped for such a pastime. He knew two languages, and
foreign radio stations vied with one another in supplying him with information.
The Ministry of State Security received foreign journals before anyone else in
the Soviet Union and distributed technical and military publications to its own
institutes uncensored. And these publications all liked to slip in a little item on
politics, on the coming global conflict, on the future political organization of
the planet. . . . Rubbing shoulders with senior security officers, Yakonov
couldn’t help hearing details unavailable to the press. Nor did he draw the line
at translated books on diplomacy and espionage. And then, of course, he had a
logical mind and well-honed ideas of his own. That was Yakonov’s game of
chess: sitting in his rocking chair watching the East-West match and trying to
divine the future from the moves they made.
But whose side was he on? His heart was with the West. But he had no doubt
which side would win. He would not stake a single chip against it. The Soviet
Union would be victorious. Yakonov had known it ever since his Western
European trip in 1927. The West was doomed just because it lived so well—
and lacked the will to risk its life in defense of the good life. Eminent Western
thinkers and statesmen rationalized their irresolution, their eagerness to put off
the battle, told themselves that the East was mending its ways, that it had noble
ideals. . . . Whatever did not fit in with this way of thinking was summarily
dismissed as slander or as a temporary phenomenon.
It was a universal law, with no exceptions: Ruthlessness always wins. All
history, alas, and all the prophets bore witness to it.
In early youth, Anton had taken to heart a saying often heard at the time:
“People are all swine.” The longer he lived, the more frequently he saw this
truth confirmed. And the surer he became of it, the easier life became for him.
Because if people were all swine, there was no need to do anything for anyone
but yourself. Let no one ask us to sacrifice on the “altar of society”; there’s no
such thing! The folk had expressed this truth very simply long ago: “Your own
shirt is closest to your body.”
That was why the custodians of dossiers and souls had no need to worry
about Yakonov’s past. When he looked back on his life, he realized that only
those who did not think quickly enough at some critical moment landed in jail.
Really clever people would foresee the danger. Take evasive action and
survive as free men. You exist only as long as there is breath in your body; why
spend your life behind bars? No! Yakonov’s renunciation of the convict world
was genuine, heartfelt, not mere pretense. No one else would have given him
four spacious rooms, a balcony, and seven thousand a month, or at least not in a
hurry. The regime had wronged him; it was wrongheaded, inept, cruel, but its
cruelty was the surest manifestation of its strength!
Since it was impossible for him to give up work altogether, Yakonov was
preparing to join the Communist Party, as soon as, and if, it was ready to
accept him.
Shikin was now handing him a list of zeks doomed to set out for the camps
the next day. Sixteen candidates had previously been agreed on, and Shikin
now approvingly added two names from Yakonov’s desk notepad. Their
contract with the prison authorities was for twenty. They had to “rustle up” the
missing from somewhere and inform Lieutenant Colonel Klimentiev not later
than 5:00 p.m.
But no candidates came to mind immediately. It seemed always to be the case
that the best of the experts and technical staff were unreliable in the operations
officer’s eyes, whereas the useless loafers were favorites of his. This made it
difficult to agree on relegation lists.
Yakonov spread his fingers. “Leave the list with me. I’ll give it a bit more
thought. You do the same. We’ll talk on the phone.”
Shikin rose without haste and (he should have restrained himself but
couldn’t) complained to this inappropriate person about the minister’s
behavior: The prisoner Rubin had been admitted to Room 21, Roitman had
been admitted, while he, Shikin, and, yes, even Colonel Yakonov were not to
be admitted to what was part of their own establishment. Unthinkable!
Yakonov raised his eyebrows and lowered his eyelids, so that for one
moment his face was that of a blind man.
“Yes, major,” he mumbled. “Yes, my friend, it is hurtful, but I dare not look
directly at the sun.”
In fact, Yakonov’s attitude to Room 21 was complicated. When, late on
Saturday night, in Abakumov’s office, he had heard from Ryumin about that
telephone call, Yakonov was thrilled by these exciting new moves in the world
chess game. Afterward, his own crisis had made him forget it all. Yesterday
morning, recovering after his heart attack, he had readily supported
Selivanovsky’s proposal to leave it all to Roitman. (It was a slippery business;
the fellow was a hothead; maybe he would break his neck.) But Yakonov had
not lost his curiosity about that rash telephone call, and he was still annoyed
that they would not let him into Room 21.
Shikin left, and Yakonov remembered that the most enjoyable of tasks
awaited him. There had been no time yesterday. If he could speed up the
absolute encoder significantly, it would be his salvation with Abakumov in a
month’s time.
He rang the design office and ordered Sologdin to bring his new design
along.
Two minutes later, Sologdin knocked and entered. Well built, with a curly
beard, in dirty overalls—and empty-handed.
Yakonov and Sologdin had hardly ever spoken to each other. Yakonov had
never had occasion to summon Sologdin to his office, and the engineer colonel
had no use for such an insignificant person in the design office or when they
passed each other in the hallway. But now, glancing at the new arrival’s name
and patronymic under the glass plate on his desk, Yakonov smiled approval
and warmly welcomed him.
“Take a seat, Dmitri Aleksandrovich. I’m very glad to see you.”
With his arms tight against his sides, Sologdin came closer, bowed silently,
and remained upright, motionless.
“I hear you’ve prepared a little surprise for us on the quiet,” Yakonov
rumbled. “The other day, it may have been on Saturday, I saw your design for
the main sequence of the absolute encoder. . . . But why don’t you sit down? I
got only a cursory look at it, and I’m dying to discuss it in detail.”
Sologdin, half facing Yakonov, stiff as a duelist awaiting his opponent’s shot,
did not lower his eyes before that friendly gaze. He spoke as if dictating his
answer.
“You are mistaken, Anton Nikolaevich. I have indeed done my best with the
encoder. But what I have managed to produce and what you saw is horribly
imperfect and all that my modest abilities permit.”
Yakonov leaned back in his chair and good-naturedly demurred.
“Come, come, my dear fellow, no false modesty, please! I only glanced at
your solution, but I formed a very favorable impression of it. Vladimir
Erastovich, whose opinion matters more than yours or mine, was most
complimentary. Now I’m going to give orders that I can’t see anybody else at
present, and you can bring along your drawing and your calculations, and we’ll
think about it. Shall we send for Vladimir Erastovich?”
Yakonov was not the philistine managerial type, interested only in end
product and output. He was an engineer, he had once been an ardently
enthusiastic engineer, and now he was feeling in anticipation the pleasure that
the product of long and successful mental effort can afford. This was the only
pleasure that his work still had to offer. He smiled sweetly at Sologdin, almost
as though he were begging a favor.
Sologdin was also an engineer, of fourteen years standing. And a convict for
twelve of them.
He felt a pleasurable chill as he lowered his visor and said deliberately, “I
repeat, Anton Nikolaevich, you are mistaken. It was a rough draft, unworthy of
your attention.”
Yakonov, now just a little annoyed, frowned and said, “Well, now, let’s just
take a look. Go and get your draft.”
His epaulets were golden with a light blue border and three stars. Three big
stars, arranged in a triangle. Just like those that had suddenly replaced the pips
on Lieutenant Kamyshan, senior operations officer at Gornaya Zakrytka, in the
months when he was beating Sologdin to a pulp, only a bit smaller.
“That rough sketch no longer exists,” Sologdin said hesitantly. “I spotted
some serious, ineradicable errors in it, and I . . . I burned it.”
(He had driven the sword home and twisted it twice.)
The colonel turned pale. In the menacing silence, only his labored breathing
could be heard. Sologdin tried to breathe noiselessly.
“What? . . . How? . . . With your own hands?”
“Of course not. I handed it over for burning. Following the correct
procedure. They were burning our waste today.”
His voice was dull, subdued. There was no trace of his usual ringing selfassurance.
“Today? So maybe it’s still intact?” Yakonov said hopefully.
“It was burned. I was watching through the window,” Sologdin answered
deliberately.
Clutching the arm of his chair with one hand and seizing his marble
paperweight with the other, as if he meant to brain Sologdin, the colonel raised
his big body and with an effort leaned forward over the desk.
Sologdin stood like a dark blue statue, head tilted backward.
The two engineers had no further need of questions and answers. Their eyes
locked, and a glare charged with insane tension passed between them.
I’ll annihilate you! the colonel’s bulging eyes said.
Hang a third sentence around my neck! the prisoner’s eyes shouted back.
A deafening storm seemed about to break.
But Yakonov, clasping his eyes and his brow as though the light was hurting
them, turned away and went over to the window.
Sologdin gripped the back of the nearest chair and wearily lowered his eyes.
A month! Just one month! Am I really done for? The message stood out stark
and clear in the colonel’s mind.
A third spell inside! I will never survive it, Sologdin told himself. His heart
was in his boots.
Yakonov turned around to face Sologdin again.
An engineer is an engineer! his eyes seemed to say. How could you?
But Sologdin’s eyes were blindingly bright; and their answer was, A
prisoner’s a prisoner! You’ve forgotten what it’s like!
They stared at each other with hypnotic hatred, each seeing himself as he
might have been, and could not unlock their gaze.
Yakonov could yell, thump the desk, ring for someone, lock him up; Sologdin
was prepared even for that.
Instead, Yakonov took out a clean, soft white handkerchief. Wiped his eyes.
And looked mildly at the prisoner.
It cost Sologdin an effort to stand firm for those extra minutes.
The engineer colonel rested one hand on the windowsill and beckoned to the
prisoner with the other.
Sologdin took three steps toward him.
Hunched like an old man, Yakonov asked, “Are you a Muscovite, Sologdin?”
“Yes.”
“Look out there, then. See the bus stop on the main road?”
It was clearly visible from the window.
Sologdin looked toward it.
“The center of Moscow is a half hour’s ride from here,” Yakonov informed
him quietly. “You could be getting on that bus in June or July this year. But
you’ve decided not to. I dare say you’d have been given your first vacation in
August. You could have gone to the Black Sea. Could have been swimming.
How long is it since you got in the water, Sologdin? Of course, prisoners
aren’t allowed to.”
“Not when they’re timber rafting?”
“I wouldn’t call that swimming! Anyway, you’ll end up so far north that the
rivers never thaw!”
You sacrifice your future, sacrifice your reputation; that’s not enough for
them. You must lose your livelihood, abandon your home, skin yourself alive,
land yourself in a labor camp.
“Sologdi-in!” Yakonov almost wailed, placing his two hands on the
prisoner’s shoulders as if to prevent himself from falling. “Surely you can
reproduce it! I don’t believe there’s anyone in the world who doesn’t want the
best out of life. Why destroy yourself? Explain it to me: Why did you burn the
drawing?”
The untroubled, incorruptible, innocent blue gaze of Dmitri Sologdin did not
waver. And Yakonov could see his own large head reflected in one dark pupil.
A light blue circle with a black pinpoint in the middle—and beyond them the
whole unexpected world of one unique person.
How fortunate the man who keeps his head, controls the course of events to
the last, ensures that what happens next is for him to decide! Why destroy
myself? Sologdin was thinking. For that lost, that debauched, that godless
people?
He answered Yakonov with a question: “Why do you think I did it?”
The rosy lips between mustache and beard curved slightly in what might
have been a mocking smile.
“I don’t understand,” Yakonov said. He removed his hands from the other
man’s shoulders and walked away. “Suicides I do not understand.”
And from behind his back, he heard that clear, confident voice: “Citizen
Colonel! I’m a complete nonentity; no one has ever heard of me! I didn’t want
to forfeit my freedom for nothing—”
Yakonov turned around abruptly.
“If I hadn’t burned the drawing but laid it before you ready for use, our
lieutenant colonel or you, Foma Guryanovich or anybody you like, could have
packed me off to a camp and put any name he liked on the drawing. And
lodging complaints from transit prisons is a very tricky business, believe you
me. They take pencils away; they won’t give you paper; your applications go
astray. . . . A prisoner in transit can never be in the right.”
Listening to all this, Yakonov felt something like admiration for the man. (He
had taken a liking to him the moment he walked in.)
“Well, then . . . can you undertake to reproduce the drawing?” The question
came not from an engineer colonel but from a helpless human being at the end
of his tether.
“All that I had on paper . . . in three days.” Sologdin’s eyes flashed. “And in
five weeks I can produce a full outline sketch with detailed specifications.
Will that do?”
“A month! One month! We must have it in a month!” Hands pressed against
the desk, he swung around to confront this diabolical engineer.
“Very well, you will have it in a month,” Sologdin assented coolly.
But Yakonov was suddenly suspicious again.
“Hold on . . . you said a moment ago that it was a worthless rough draft, that
you’d found fundamental and irreparable errors in it.”
Sologdin laughed out loud. “Lack of phosphorus, oxygen, and fresh
impressions sometimes plays strange tricks on me. I suffer a sort of blackout.
But now I will side with Professor Chelnov and say all is as it should be.”
Yakonov smiled back at him, smiled with relief, and sat down. He was full
of admiration for Sologdin’s aplomb and the skill with which he had steered
their conversation.
“You’ve been playing a risky game, my friend. It might easily have ended
differently.”
“Not really, Anton Nikolaevich. I think I have a pretty clear idea of the
institute’s position . . . and your own. You understand French, of course? ‘Le
hasard est roi.’ Long live the main chance! When we catch a rare glimpse of it,
we must jump and land squarely on its back!”
Sologdin could not have been more at ease if he had been chatting with
Nerzhin at the woodpile.
He sat down at last, still gazing cheerfully at Yakonov.
“So what do we do?” the engineer colonel asked amicably.
Sologdin answered as if reading from a printed text a decision made long
ago.
“I would like to bypass Foma Guryanovich at the first stage. He’s just the
sort of person who likes to be coauthor. I don’t anticipate any little trick of that
sort from you. Don’t tell me I’m wrong.”
Yakonov happily shook his head. He was too relieved to want coauthorship.
“Next, let me remind you that as things stand, the draft has been burned. If
you think well of my project, find some way to mention me directly to the
minister. Or, at the very least, to the deputy minister. And let him, personally,
be the one to sign the order appointing me designer in chief. That will be my
insurance, and then I can get to work. We’ll form a special group—”
The door was suddenly flung open wide, and skinny, bald-headed Stepanov,
opaquely gleaming, entered without knocking.
“Right, Anton Nikolaevich,” he said sternly. “We have something important
to discuss.”
Stepanov addressing someone by his given name and patronymic!
Unbelievable.
Sologdin stood up. “So I can expect the order?” he said.
The engineer colonel nodded, and Sologdin went out. With a light but firm
step.
Yakonov did not immediately fathom what the Party organizer was talking
about with such animation.
“Comrade Yakonov! I’ve been visited by comrades from the Political
Administration and given a thorough dressing-down. I have made serious
mistakes. I have permitted a group of . . . let’s call them homeless
cosmopolitans to move in on our Party organization. And I have been guilty of
political shortsightedness in failing to make your life a misery. But we must
fearlessly acknowledge our mistakes! So let the two of us draft a resolution
immediately, then convene an open Party meeting and strike a powerful blow
against the slavish worship of all things foreign!”
Yakonov’s situation, which had looked so desperate early yesterday, had
taken a sharp turn for the better.