Chapter-62-Two-Sons-in-Law

THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR’S FIRSTWIFE had gone through the Civil War with
him. She was a proficient machine-gunner; her life was regulated by the latest
instructions from her Party cell. She could never have raised the house of
Makarygin to its present level of prosperity. Indeed, it is difficult to imagine
how, if she had not died giving birth to Klara, she could have adjusted to the
intricate twists and turns of the times.
Alevtina Nikanorovna, Makarygin’s present wife, on the other hand, had
transformed the family’s life, enriching and filling with new sap what had been
a stunted and parched existence. She had no very clear conception of class
distinctions, and political instruction had taken up very little of her time. What
she knew for certain was that a respectable family cannot thrive without good
cooking and an abundance of good quality bed and table linen. And that as the
family consolidates its position, such important outward signs of prosperity as
silver, cut glass, and fine carpets must make their appearance. Alevtina
Nikanorovna’s great talent was for acquiring these things without great
expense, never missing a good buy—at closed auctions, in the private shops
for employees in the procuratorial and judicial system, in commission shops,
or in the flea markets of “newly incorporated territories.” She made special
journeys to Lvov and Riga when no one could get there without a pass and
when old ladies were only too glad to sell their heavy tablecloths and their
dinner services for a song. She became a great expert on glassware. She did
not collect the glass now produced by the state Glass Combine, warped in its
passage through relays of indifferent hands, but old-fashioned crystal that
somehow preserved the character of its creator and sparkled with his
craftsmanship. A great deal of it had been confiscated by court order in the
twenties and thirties and sold later to a privileged few.
That evening, as always, the table was beautifully laid and the food so
plentiful that the two very young Bashkir maids, the Makarygins’ own and
another borrowed from the neighbors for the party, could hardly keep up with
the rapid succession of dishes. Both girls were from the same village,
Chekmagush, and had left school together the summer before. Their faces, tense
and flushed from the heat of the kitchen, showed awareness of the importance
of the occasion and eagerness to please. They were satisfied with their
position and hoped that not by next spring but by the one after they would have
earned enough and bought the right clothes to find husbands in the city instead
of going back to the kolkhoz. Alevtina Nikanorovna, a fine figure of a woman
whom no one would call old, watched the servants with approval.
What particularly preoccupied the hostess was the last-minute change of
plan. It was to have been a party for the youngsters. The only older people
present were to be members of the family. Makarygin had given a banquet for
his colleagues two days earlier and this time had invited only the Serb Dushan
Radovich, an old friend of his from the Civil War and subsequently a professor
in the long-abolished Institute of Red Professors. Apart from him, a humble
girlhood friend of the prosecutor’s wife, in Moscow on a shopping expedition
from the rural district where her husband was a minor Party official, had been
allowed to attend. But then, quite unexpectedly, Major General Slovuta, also a
prosecutor and a very important man in the service, had arrived back from the
Far East (where he was involved in the sensational trial of the Japanese
officers accused of planning bacteriological warfare), and it was impossible
not to invite him. But now, in Slovuta’s presence, they felt ashamed of those
semilegal guests, the prosecutor’s old friend and the friend of his wife’s youth,
both hardly friends anymore. Slovuta might think that the Makarygins
entertained riffraff. This thought was complicating and poisoning Alevtina
Nikanorovna’s evening. She seated her old friend, who was miserable because
she was married to a nitwit, as far from Slovuta as possible, and made her talk
quietly and attack her food less greedily. At the same time, the hostess was
gratified that her friend tried every dish, asked for recipes, and was enchanted
in turn by the tableware and the guests.
It was for Slovuta’s sake that they had invited Innokenty so pressingly,
insisting that he should come in his diplomatic uniform, with the gold braid,
and so, together with their other son-in-law, the celebrated writer Nikolai
Galakhov, make the occasion no ordinary one. But to his father-in-law’s
annoyance, the diplomat had arrived late, when supper was over and the young
people had drifted away to dance.
Innokenty had reluctantly given in and put on that accursed uniform. On the
way there, he had felt like a lost soul. But staying at home was just as
impossible. There was nowhere he could bear to be. And yet, when he entered,
sour faced, an apartment full of people, of animated chatter, laughter, and color,
he felt that this was the one place in which he could not possibly be arrested
and quickly recovered his equilibrium, indeed felt more relaxed than usual. He
eagerly drank what was poured out for him, eagerly helped himself from one
dish and another; for twenty-four hours he had scarcely been able to swallow,
but now his appetite was happily roused.
His high spirits mollified his father-in-law and made conversation easier at
the “distinguished” end of the table, where Makarygin had been desperately
maneuvering to prevent Radovich from firing off some provocative remark, to
keep Slovuta happy, and to make sure Galakhov was not bored. Now, lowering
his rich bass voice, he began jokingly reproving Innokenty for not gladdening
his old age with grandchildren.
“What do you think of him and his wife?” he grumbled. “Here they are, a
well-matched couple, a ram and a ewe—and what do they do, they just live for
themselves, get fat, not a care in the world. They’ve got it made! And they burn
the candle at both ends! Ask this young dog, and he’ll tell you he’s an
Epicurean. Am I right, Innokenty? Own up, now, you’re a follower of Epicurus,
aren’t you?
It was impossible, even as a joke, to call a member of the All-Union
Communist Party a Young Hegelian, a Neo-Kantian, a subjectivist, an agnostic,
or—God forbid—a revisionist. But “Epicurean” sounded so inoffensive that it
couldn’t possibly affect a man’s claim to be an orthodox Marxist.
Radovich, who knew and cherished every detail in the biographies of the
Founding Fathers, seized his opportunity to contribute.
“Well, Epicurus was a good man, a materialist. Karl Marx himself wrote a
dissertation on Epicurus.”
Radovich was wearing a threadbare semimilitary tunic, and his skin was
dark parchment stretched over a blocky head. (He had never left the house
without his Budenny helmet until just recently, when the militia started pulling
him over.)
Innokenty warmed to the theme and looked challengingly at these
unsuspecting people. What a bold step it was, to intervene in a struggle
between Titans! At that moment he saw himself as the darling of the gods. For
Makarygin, and even for Slovuta, both of whom might have aroused his
contempt at any other time, he felt a sort of affection, because they were fellow
men and also contributors to his present safety.
“Epicurus?” He accepted the challenge, eyes twinkling. “Yes, I’m his
follower; I don’t deny it. But it may surprise you to learn that ‘epicurean’ is
one of those words which are wrongly understood in common usage. When
people want to say that someone has an inordinate appetite for life, is sensual,
lustful, or even just a hog, they say, ‘He’s an epicurean.’ No, wait a minute, I’m
serious about this!” He cut short their protests, excitedly waving the empty tallstemmed
wineglass he held in his thin, sensitive fingers. “In fact, Epicurus is
just the opposite of our general conception of him. He most certainly does not
incite us to take part in orgies. Among the three main evils that prevent men
from being happy, Epicurus includes insatiable desires! You didn’t know that,
did you? He says that in reality man needs very little, and for that very reason
his happiness is not at fate’s mercy! He frees man from fear of fate’s blows,
and that makes Epicurus a great optimist!”
“You do surprise me!” Galakhov said, and took out a leather-bound notebook
complete with white ivory pencil. In spite of his resounding fame, Galakhov
behaved like one of the boys and went in for winking and backslapping. His
graying blond hair made a picturesque contrast to his swarthy, rather fleshy
features.
“Quick, give him another drink,” Slovuta said to Makarygin, pointing to
Innokenty’s empty glass, “or he’ll talk our heads off.”
His father-in-law filled his glass, and once more Innokenty drank with
enjoyment. At that moment he almost felt himself that Epicurus’s philosophy
was worth adopting.
Slovuta, whose face was puffy but not that of an old man, treated Makarygin
with a certain condescension (his promotion to colonel general had already
been approved) but was delighted to make Galakhov’s acquaintance. He
pictured himself later that evening making another visit he had in mind and
casually announcing that an hour ago he had been having a few drinks with
Kolya Galakhov, who had told him. . . . But Galakhov, too, had arrived late
and, for once, said nothing at all; no doubt his mind was on his next novel.
Concluding that there was nothing to be gotten from the celebrity, Slovuta was
ready to leave.
Makarygin, however, urged him to stay a bit longer and persuaded him that
they “must worship at the altar of tobacco,” by which he meant the collection
he kept in his study. He himself smoked Bulgarian pipe tobacco, which he got
through a friend, and made do with cigars in the evening. But he liked to
impress his guests by regaling them with different blends in turn.
The door to his study was right behind them. Their host opened it and invited
Slovuta and his sons-in-law to step inside. The sons-in-law, however, made
excuses and left the older men to their own company. Makarygin, more afraid
than ever that Dushan would let his tongue run away with him, stood aside to
let Slovuta enter and wagged a warning finger at the Serb in the doorway.
The brothers-in-law were left by themselves at the deserted end of the table.
They were at that happy age (Galakhov was the older by a few years) at which,
though still considered young, they were no longer dragged off to dance, and
they could indulge in men’s talk among the half-empty bottles to the
accompaniment of music somewhere in the background.
A week ago, in fact, Galakhov had conceived the idea of writing about the
imperialist conspiracy and the struggle of Soviet diplomats for peace, not a
novel this time but a play, which would make it easier for him to avoid all the
unfamiliar details of locale and dress. This was an excellent opportunity to
interview his brother-in-law, simultaneously noting the characteristics of a
typical Soviet diplomat and extracting detailed information about life in the
West, where the whole action of the play was to take place but where
Galakhov himself had been only very briefly, at one of the “progressive”
congresses. Galakhov realized that it wasn’t quite the thing to be writing about
a way of life of which you knew nothing, but in recent years he had found that
life abroad or some hoary historical theme or even fantasy about the
inhabitants of the moon yielded more easily to his pen than the real life all
around him, where every path lay through a minefield of taboos.
The servants were rattling tea things. The hostess looked about her and, with
Slovuta out of the way, no longer tried to keep her old friend’s voice down as
she insisted that even in the Zarechensky raion there were good medical
facilities, good doctors, and that the children of Party activists were separated
from the rest in early infancy and assured of an uninterrupted supply of milk
and unstinted penicillin injections.
Music reached them from a record player in the next room and the metallic
boom of a television set from the room beyond.
Bright-eyed and confident after his triumphant defense of Epicurus, Innokenty
assented.
“It’s the privilege of writers to interrogate. Like investigating officers,
endlessly questioning people about their crimes.”
“What we look for in a man is not his crimes but his virtues, his positive
characteristics.”
“Then the demands of your work are at odds with those of your conscience.
You say you want to write a book about diplomats?”
Galakhov smiled.
“Say what you like, Ink, these things need more thought than a New Year
interview. You need to stock up with material in advance. And you can’t start
questioning just any diplomat. It’s my good luck we’re related.”
“And your choice shows how perceptive you are. A diplomat who wasn’t a
relative would tell you a load of nonsense. There are things we need to hide,
you know.”
They looked into each other’s eyes.
“I realize that. But I won’t be trying to show that side of your work. I’m not
—”
“Aha! What mainly interests you, then, is embassy life, our daily routine,
what goes on at receptions, the presentation of credentials, and all that. . . .”
“No, I want to go deeper than that. I want to show how certain things are
refracted in the minds of Soviet diplomats.”
“Refracted, eh. . . . Right, I’ve got it. And I’ll tell you all about it before the
evening’s out. But you tell me something first. What about the war? Have you
given up writing about it? Have you exhausted the subject?”
Galakhov shook his head. “It can never be exhausted.”
“Yes, that war was your good luck. Where else would you have found your
conflicts and tragedies?”
Innokenty was still smiling.
The writer’s brow clouded over.
“The war theme,” he said, “is engraved on my heart.”
“And you’ve created masterpieces in that genre!”
“And I daresay it will be with me forever. I will keep returning to it as long
as I live.”
“Perhaps it would be better not to?”
“I must! Because the war stirs noble emotions in men’s souls. . . .”
“It does, I agree. But what does all this war literature come down to? How to
take up battle stations, how to carry out a saturation bombardment, ‘we’ll
never forget, never forgive,’ an officer’s command is law to his subordinates.
But all that is much better put in army regulations. Oh, yes, and you also show
what difficulty the wretched officers have in locating anything on a map.”
Galakhov frowned. Commanding officers were his favorite military
characters.
“Are you talking about my last novel?”
“Of course not, Nikolai! But do works of imagination really have to
reproduce army regulations? or newspaper articles? or slogans? Mayakovsky,
for one, took pride in using an excerpt from a newspaper as the epigraph to a
poem. In other words, he prided himself on not rising above the level of a
newspaper. If that’s how you think, what’s the point of literature? After all, a
writer exists to teach other people. Isn’t that what was always expected of
him?”
The brothers-in-law met infrequently and did not know each other well.
“What you say is true only under bourgeois regimes,” Galakhov replied
cautiously.
Innokenty wasn’t going to argue with that.
“Of course, of course. Our laws are quite different. . . . I didn’t mean to. . . .”
He made a circular movement with his hand. “Please believe me, Kolya. I
really like you. . . . And that’s why I particularly want to ask you . . . while I’m
in the mood . . . as one of the family. . . . Have you ever asked yourself . . .
How do you see your place in Russian literature? I mean, you’ve written
enough for a six-volume collected works. You’re thirty-seven . . . they’d
already bumped Pushkin off at your age. You’re not in danger of that. Still, you
can’t evade the question: Who are you? Is this tormented age any the richer for
your ideas? Apart, of course, from the incontrovertible ideas you yourself owe
to socialist realism.” Innokenty abandoned sarcasm and asked his next question
as though it hurt.
“Tell me, Kolya, don’t you sometimes feel ashamed of our generation?”
Small furrows came and went on Galakhov’s brow, and he sucked his cheeks
in.
“You’re touching me on a sensitive spot,” he answered, staring at the
tablecloth. “What Russian writer hasn’t secretly tried on Pushkin’s frock coat?
Or Tolstoy’s blouse?” He turned his pencil this way and that on the tablecloth
and looked at Innokenty with eyes that had nothing to hide. He, too, felt an urge
to speak out, to say things that couldn’t be said with other writers present.
“When I was a kid, at the beginning of the Five-Year Plans, I thought I would
die happy if I could just see my name in print over a poem. I imagined that
would be the beginning of immortality. But then. . . .”
Dotnara advanced on them, avoiding empty chairs or pushing them out of her
way.
“Ini! Kolya! You won’t shoo me off, will you? Are you talking about
something too clever for me?”
She couldn’t have chosen a worse moment.
As she came toward them, the very sight of her, the thought that she was an
inescapable part of his life, suddenly brought home to Innokenty the dreadful
truth. He remembered what awaited him. The party and the humorous
exchanges at table ceased to exist. His heart sank. His throat was hot and dry.
Meanwhile, Dotty stood waiting for an answer, toying with the edges of her
raglan blouse. Her fair hair fell loosely over her narrow fur collar. She knew
how to make the best of herself and had ignored nine years of changing
hairstyles. She was flushed—or was it the cherry red blouse that made her
look like that? And there was that doelike tremor of the upper lip that he knew
and loved. It happened when someone paid her a compliment or obviously
found her attractive. But why just now?
She had been trying for so long to emphasize how independent of him she
was, how different her view of life was from his. Why this sudden change? A
presentiment that they were to part? Why was she suddenly so meek and
affectionate? Why that doelike twitch of the lip?
Innokenty could never forgive her and had not even asked himself whether he
could forgive her for the long spell of incomprehension, estrangement, and
unfaithfulness. He knew that she, too, could not change all at once. But this
meekness of hers warmed his cramped heart. He took her hand and drew her
onto a chair beside him, something that would have been impossible between
them all through the autumn.
Dotty submitted gracefully, sat down beside her husband, and clung to him,
not indecorously close but close enough for all to see how much she loved him
and how happy she was to be with him. It occurred to Innokenty briefly, with
Dotty’s future in mind, that it would be better for her not to make this show of
an intimacy that did not really exist. But he gently stroked her arm in the cherry
red sleeve.
The writer’s white ivory pencil lay idle.
Leaning on the table, Galakhov stared past husband and wife at the big
window, which was lit by the streetlights at the Kaluga Gate. He could not talk
frankly about himself with women around. Nor, perhaps, without them.
But . . . nowadays his poems, however long, appeared in print. Hundreds of
theaters throughout the country put on his plays after their run in Moscow. Girls
copied out his verses and learned them by heart. The central press had happily
put its pages at his disposal during the war. He had tried his hand at the
feuilleton, the long short story, criticism. And finally his novel had appeared.
He had won one Stalin Prize, then another and yet another. And where had it
gotten him? Strangely, he had won fame but not immortality.
He himself had not noticed when and how he had overburdened the bird of
immortality and crippled its flight. Perhaps it had taken wing only in those few
lines that schoolgirls memorized. As for the plays, the stories, the novel, they
had died on him before he had reached the age of thirty-seven.
But why should anyone strive for immortality? Most of Galakhov’s fellow
writers had no thought of immortality. What mattered to them was their position
in their own lifetime. To hell with immortality, they said; surely it’s more
important to influence the course of events here and now? And influence it they
did. Their books served the people, they were published in print runs of
hundreds of thousands, government subsidies assured their dissemination to
libraries everywhere, and special book-promotion months were organized for
them. Of course, much that was true could not be written about. But they
consoled themselves with the thought that circumstances would change
someday, and they would return to the same events, show them in a different
and truer light, publish amended versions of their old books. Meanwhile, the
thing to do was to write at least that quarter, that eighth, that sixteenth, or—yes,
damn it!—that one thirty-second part of the truth which was permitted. Write
about love and kisses and the beauties of nature if you like; any little thing was
better than nothing.
But Galakhov was oppressed by a feeling that every decent page was harder
to write than the last one. He forced himself to work to a timetable, struggled
against his yawning fits, his mental sluggishness, his wandering thoughts, his
habit of listening for the mailman and breaking off to look at the newspapers.
He saw to it that his study was aired, that the room temperature was 18°C, that
his desk was clean and polished; otherwise, he could not write.
Whenever he started on a new, large work, he was full of fire and swore to
himself and his friends that this time he would make no concessions, that he
would write a real book. He sat down enthusiastically to write the first pages.
But he soon began to notice that he was not alone, that an image floated up and
hovered ever more distinctly before him, the image of the one for whom he
was writing and with whose eyes he willy-nilly reread each newly written
paragraph. And this one was not the reader, his brother, friend, and
contemporary, nor was he a generalized critic, but for some reason always the
illustrious critic in chief, Yermilov.
Galakhov could not help imagining Yermilov reading this new work with his
chin flattened against his chest, preparing to open fire on it with an enormous
(it had happened before) full-page article in Literary Gazette. He would give
it some such title as “Unwholesome Trends” or “Another Look at Certain
Fashionable Tendencies on Our Tried and Tested Path.” He would not get
straight to the point but would begin with some sacrosanct statement by
Belinsky or Nekrasov with which only a villain could fail to agree. Then he
would carefully twist these words, turn them around till they meant something
quite different, and Belinsky or Herzen would be seen passionately attesting
that Galakhov’s new book showed him to be an antisocial, antihuman figure
with shaky philosophical foundations.
Trying paragraph after paragraph to anticipate Yermilov’s objections and
adjust himself to them, Galakhov soon weakened in his efforts to express
himself fully. Of its own accord the book spinelessly curled up and collapsed.
When he was already halfway through, Galakhov saw that a different book had
been foisted on him, and he had another failure on his hands.
“Oh, yes, you were asking what Soviet diplomats are like.” Innokenty
resumed where he had left off. But his voice was hollow, and he wore a wry
smile. “You can easily imagine them for yourself. Firm ideological
convictions. High principles. Total dedication to the cause. Profound personal
devotion to Comrade Stalin. Unswerving adherence to instructions from
Moscow. Some have a very good, others a poor knowledge of foreign
languages. And then of course their great enthusiasm for the pleasures of the
flesh. Because, as the saying goes, we only live once.”