Chapter-08-“Oh,-Moment,-Stay!”

“WHOSE BALD HEAD IS THAT, rubbing the back of mine?”
“I’m in a poetic mood, my child. Let’s have a chat.”
“Actually, I’m busy.”
“Come off it! Busy! I’m upset, Glebochka! Sitting by that improvised German
Christmas tree, I started talking about my dugout in the bridgehead north of
Pultusk, and suddenly it all came rushing back. The war! Life at the front! So
vivid! So nostalgic! . . . Listen, war has its good points. . . . Wouldn’t you
say?”
“You aren’t the first I’ve heard say so. I’ve read in those magazines for
German soldiers that sometimes came our way: the cleansing of the soul,
Soldatentreue.
*
“Swine. But if you like, there’s a rational kernel in all that—”
“I refuse to believe it. The Taoist ethic says that ‘weapons are the
instruments of misfortune, not honor. The wise man wins reluctantly.’ ”
“What’s this I hear? The ex-skeptic has signed up with the Taoists now?”
“I haven’t quite decided.”
“I started by remembering my favorite Fritzes—how we used to make up
captions for leaflets. A mother embracing her children, a flaxen-haired
Margarita weeping, that was our main leaflet, with the message in verse.”
“I remember it. I used to come across them.”
“And suddenly it all came back in a rush. . . . Did I ever tell you about
Milka? She graduated from the Institute of Foreign Languages in ’41, and they
posted her to our unit as a translator. A snub-nosed girl, moved a bit
awkwardly—”
“Hold on. . . . Was she the one who went with you to receive the surrender of
Graudenz?”
“Aha! Extraordinarily vain little thing she was. Loved being complimented
on her work, and woe betide anyone who told her off—loved being
recommended for decorations. Remember the woods just beyond Lovat, to the
south of Podtsepochie as you go from Rachlitsy toward Novo-Svinukhovo?”
“It’s all woods around there. This side of the Redya or the other?”
“This side.”
“Right, got it.”
“Well, she and I went rambling in those woods. We were there all day. It
wasn’t spring yet. March. You squished about in water, sloshed through the
puddles in your felt boots, your head was drenched with sweat under your fur
cap, but there was that wonderful smell—you know—that air. We wandered
about like young lovers, like newlyweds. Well, if a woman’s new to you, you
relive it all together from the very beginning, you blossom and ripen like a
young lad, and . . . you know. . . . That never-ending forest! Just occasionally
smoke from a dugout, a battery of seventy-sixes in a clearing. We avoided
them. We went on wandering till evening, a damp, pink sunset. I’d been aching
for her all day. And suddenly a ‘crate’started circling overhead. And Milka
decided she didn’t want to see it shot down—‘It’s doing no harm, and if it isn’t
shot down, fine, we’ll spend the night out here in the forest.’ ”
“That meant she’d surrendered! Who ever saw our antiaircraft gunners hit a
crate?”
“Right. . . . Every ack-ack gun on either side of the Lovat blazed away at it
for a good hour—and never touched it. So we found an empty bunker.”
“A surface bunker?”
“Yes. Remember them? They’d built a lot of them the year before, like dens
for wild animals.”
“The ground was too wet to dig in.”
“Right. The floor inside was strewn with pine branches; there was a smell of
resin from the walls, and of smoke from previous fires. There were no stoves;
you had to make your fire right there on the floor. There was a little hole in the
roof. No light, of course. As long as the fire was burning, it cast shadows on
the timbered walls. . . . That’s living, eh, Gleb?”
“I’ve noticed that if one of the characters in a story told by a prisoner is a
maiden, all the listeners, including me, are desperately anxious for her to be a
maiden no longer when the story ends. In fact, that constitutes the main interest
of the story for the zek. This shows a need to know that there is justice in the
world, don’t you think? A blind man needs to be reassured by the sighted that
the sky is still blue and the grass still green. The zek needs to believe that,
theoretically, there are still real, live attractive women in this world and that
they give themselves to lucky men. . . . Some evening you’ve remembered!
Making love, and in a pine-scented shelter at that, with no shooting going on.
Some kind of war that is! Only that same evening your wife was changing her
sugar coupons for a sticky mess of sweets squashed into the paper and planning
to ration them so that they’d last your daughters thirty days.”
“Go on, then, reproach me. . . . A man mustn’t know just one woman, Glebka;
if he does, he knows nothing at all about them. It impoverishes the human
spirit.”
“The spirit as well? Didn’t somebody say ‘If you’ve really known one
woman . . .’ ”
“That’s rubbish.”
“What about two, then?”
“Two will get you nowhere either. Only by comparing many can you begin to
understand. It’s no vice, no sin—it’s nature’s design.”
“Coming back to the war. In cell No. 73 in Butyrki . . .”
“. . . along a narrow corridor on the second floor . . .”
“Just so! A young Moscow historian, Professor Razvodovsky, who had just
been put inside and had never of course been at the front, argued cleverly,
passionately, and cogently, on social, historical, and ethical grounds, that war
has its good side. There were ten front-line soldiers in the cell, some ours,
some Vlasovites,
** but all desperate characters, wild cats. They’d fought in
every spot you can think of, and they almost tore that professor apart; they
furiously denied that there was the least little smidgen of good in war! I
listened—and said nothing. Razvodovsky’s arguments were strong ones; at
moments I thought he was right, and my own recollections sometimes suggested
that there was good there, but I didn’t dare argue with those soldiers: the
‘something’ on which I was ready to agree with a civilian professor was the
same something which made me, a heavy artilleryman, different from the
infantry. Just think, Lev, except for the time when you took that fortress you
were just a desk soldier at the front, never in a close engagement from which
retreat would have been more than your life was worth. I wasn’t much more of
a soldier myself; I was never in the first wave of an offensive, and I never had
to rally the men. You know how it is: Memory is treacherous, and all the
honors sink to the bottom —”
“Look, I’m not saying—”
“—and only the pleasant things remain. But ever since Junker dive-bombers
nearly made mincemeat of me one fine day at Orel—sorry, I just can’t
recapture the pleasure. No, Lyovka, war is best when it’s farthest away.”
“Well, I’m not saying that war itself is good, only that we can have good
memories of it.”
“So maybe we’ll have good memories of the camps one of these days. And
of the transit prisons.”
“Transit prisons? Gorky? Kirov? N-n-no. . . .”
“Just because the administration there swiped your suitcase, you refuse to
look at it objectively. Ask a VIP—with a job in the clothes storeroom, say, or
the bathhouse, and shacked up with a love-girl. He’ll tell you there’s no place
like a transit prison. What it comes down to is that happiness is a relative
concept; it’s all in the mind.”
“Etymologically the Russian word for happiness has unmistakable
connotations of ‘transience’ and ‘insubstantiality.’ Schast’e comes from sechas’e,
meaning ‘this hour,’ ‘this moment.’ ”
“Sorry, my learned friend, it doesn’t. Look it up in Dahl. It comes from sochast’e,
the share a person wrests from life. Its peculiar etymology gives us a
pretty sordid conception of happiness.”
“Just a minute. My explanation also comes from Dahl.”
“You surprise me. So does mine, I tell you.”
“This calls for research in all languages. I’ll make a note!”
“Madman!”
“It’s an idiot who says so! Let’s do a bit of comparative philology.”
“Like Marr, you mean? Everything derives from the word for ‘hand’?”
“You bum, you! Listen, have you ever read Goethe’s Faust, part 2?”
“Why don’t you ask whether I’ve read part 1? Everybody says it’s a work of
genius, but nobody reads it. Some people rely on Gounod’s version!
“No, part 1 is quite straightforward. What’s the problem?”
“ ‘Of sons and worlds I cannot speak;
human toil is all I see.’
“Now that does something for me!
“Or there’s this:
“ ‘What we don’t know is just what we needed;
What we know is no use to us.’ ”
“That’s great!”
“Part 2, I admit, is heavy going. But what a profound idea. You know the
contract between Faust and Mephistopheles: Mephistopheles will take
possession of Faust’s soul only when Faust cries: ‘Stay, fleeting moment, thou
art beautiful!’ But whatever Mephistopheles lays before him—the return of his
youth, Margarita’s love, easy victory over his rival, boundless wealth,
knowledge of all the secrets of existence—nothing can wring from Faust’s
breast the fateful exclamation. Many years have passed; by now
Mephistopheles himself is worn-out, trailing after this insatiable being; he sees
that there is no way of making the man happy and is ready to abandon this
barren sport. Faust, by now aged and blind all over again, gives orders for
thousands of workers to be summoned to dig canals and drain the marshes. His
brain, senile for the second time and—or so the cynic Mephistopheles thinks—
crazed and clouded, is aglow with a grand idea: to make mankind happy. At a
signal from Mephistopheles, hell’s servants appear and start digging Faust’s
grave. Mephistopheles has lost all hope of winning his soul and simply wants
to bury him, to be rid of him. Faust hears the sound of many shovels. ‘What is
that?’ he asks. The spirit of mockery has not deserted Mephistopheles. He
paints Faust a false picture of the draining of the marshes. Soviet critics like to
interpret this passage in the spirit of socialist optimism: As they would have it,
Faust, feeling that he has benefited mankind, and finding in this his supreme
joy, exclaims: ‘Stay, fleeting moment, thou art beautiful!’ But we have to ask
ourselves whether Goethe was not ridiculing the idea of human happiness.
Because in reality nothing whatsoever has been done for mankind. Faust
pronounces the long-awaited sacramental phrase one step from the grave,
deluded and perhaps truly insane, and the lemurs immediately hustle him into
the hole. Is this Goethe’s hymn to happiness, or is he ridiculing it?”
“Ah, this is the Lyovochka I love—reasoning from the heart, talking wisely,
and not sticking abusive labels on things.”
“You miserable latter-day Pyrrho! I knew I would make you happy! And I
haven’t finished yet. In one of my prewar lectures—they were devilishly
daring!—I developed this excerpt from Goethe into the elegiac idea that there
is no such thing as happiness, that it is either unattainable or illusory. Then,
suddenly, a note was passed to me, a page torn out of a miniature notebook—
squared paper:
“ ‘But I’m in love—and I am happy! What do you say to that?’ ”
“What did you say?”
“What can anybody say?”
* Soldatentreue: Soldierly loyalty; a military ethic of commitment to one’s
comrades in arms.
** Vlasovites: Followers of General Andrei Vlasov, the Soviet commander
who defected to the Germans in World War II and fought against the Soviet
regime.