Chapter-83-The-King-of-Stool-Pigeons

IN THE RARE MOMENTS when he was not preoccupied with the struggle for
existence, truckling to his masters, or trying to work, Artur Siromakha, no
longer as tense and wary as a leopard, was seen to be a rather languid young
man. He had the build of an athlete, but his face was that of an actor jaded by
too many performances, and his vague blue-gray eyes seemed clouded by
sadness.
Two quick-tempered men had called Siromakha a stoolie to his face, and
both were speedily transported. Since then, nobody had repeated the word in
his hearing. People were afraid of him. A prisoner was never confronted with
the stoolie who had denounced him. He would never know whether he was
accused of planning to escape, to commit a terrorist act, or to join a mutiny. He
would simply be told to collect his belongings. And whisked off to . . . a
camp? Or perhaps to a high-security jail for interrogation?
Tyrants and jailers use their knowledge of human nature skillfully. As long as
a man is capable of unmasking traitors, inciting a crowd to revolt, or
sacrificing his life to save others, hope is not yet dead in him; he still believes
that all may yet be well, still clings to the pathetic shreds of happiness left to
him, and so is silent and submissive. But once he is shackled and prostrate, has
nothing left to lose, and so is capable of heroism, only the stone box of an
isolation cell will feel the force of his belated fury. Unless the chill breath of a
death sentence renders him indifferent to all earthly things.
Siromakha had not been publicly unmasked or caught in the act, but no one
doubted that he was a stoolie. Some avoided him; others thought it safer to be
friendly, to join with him in a game of volleyball and smutty talk. That was
how they got along with other stoolies, too. So life in the sharashka looked
peaceful enough, but beneath the surface, war to the death was raging.
Artur could talk about other things besides women. The Forsyte Saga was
one of his favorite books, and he discussed it quite intelligently. (Though
Galsworthy shared his favors with a bunch of well-thumbed detective stories.)
Artur also had an ear for music. He was fond of Spanish and Italian airs, he
could whistle snatches of Verdi and Rossini in tune, and he had gone once a
year to a concert in the Conservatoire, feeling that life would be incomplete
without it.
The Siromakhas were gentry, impoverished gentry. At the beginning of the
century, one Siromakha had been a composer, another sentenced to forced
labor for a serious crime, while yet another had declared enthusiastically for
the Revolution and served in the Cheka.
When Artur came of age, he had felt that an assured independent income was
essential to someone of his tastes and needs. An uneventful, stick-in-the-mud
existence, a daily grind from x a.m. to y p.m., and a twice-monthly pay
envelope subject to hefty deductions for tax and State Loan subscriptions did
not appeal to him at all. When he went to the movies, he quite seriously sized
up all the famous female stars as potential partners. He could easily imagine
himself making a dash for Argentina with Deanna Durbin.
A university education was obviously not the route to such a life. Artur put
out feelers for a job in which he could flit lightly from flower to flower. And a
job of the right kind was looking for him. They met. The job did not pay as
well as he could have wished, but it exempted him from the draft during the
war and so saved his life. While fools out there were moldering in clay
trenches, Artur—smooth-cheeked, creamy-complexioned, grave-faced Artur—
was strolling nonchalantly into the Savoy Restaurant. (Ah, that moment when
you cross the threshold of a restaurant and the cooking smells and the music lap
around you while you select your table.)
Artur’s whole being sang that he was on the way up. People who regarded
his employment as ignoble aroused his indignation. He put it down to
ignorance or envy. His was a job for the talented. It demanded powers of
observation, a good memory, quick wits, and the ability to dissemble, to act a
part. It was work for an artist. It had to be hush-hush, of course. Without
secrecy it would cease to exist. But secrecy was essential for purely technical
reasons. Like, say, the protective visor needed by an electric welder.
Otherwise, Artur would not have dreamed of keeping his work secret. There
was nothing morally reprehensible about it!
One day, finding that he was living beyond his means, Artur had joined a
coterie with designs on state property. He was jailed. Artur was not the man to
take it amiss: He blamed himself for getting caught. From his very first days
there, Artur naturally felt that his sojourn behind barbed wire was merely a
continuation of his old occupation in a different form.
The security services did not let him down. He was not sent logging or down
a mine but given a job in the Cultural and Educational Section. This was the
only place in the camp with a little light, the one cozy corner where you could
look in for half an hour before lights out and feel human again: scan a
newspaper, hold a guitar, remind yourself of verses you once knew or the
incredible life you once led. The camp’s “Dilly Tomatoviches” (the hardened
criminals’ name for incorrigible intellectuals) frequented the place, and Artur,
with his artist’s soul, his sympathetic eyes, his Moscow memories, and his
talent for skimming the surface of any subject whatsoever, was very much at
home there.
He lost no time in reporting a number of individual “agitators,” a “group”
with anti-Soviet attitudes, two escape attempts not yet at the planning stage but
(he said) contemplated, and the camp’s very own version of the “Doctors’
Plot”
*
: Medical saboteurs were deliberately prolonging the treatment of
patients—in other words, letting them rest up in the hospital. All these sitting
ducks had their sentences prolonged, whereas Artur’s was reduced by two
years.
In Marfino, Artur did not neglect the profession that had served him so well.
He became the pet, the soul mate, of both godfather-majors, and the most
dangerous informer in the institute.
But while taking advantage of his denunciations, the majors did not share
their own secrets with him. So Siromakha did not know which of the two had
used Doronin as an informer and was most in need of up-to-date news of him.
Much has been written about the astounding ingratitude and disloyalty of
humanity at large. But there are exceptions. With reckless prodigality, Ruska
Doronin had confided his “double agent” scheme not just to one zek, not just to
three, but to twenty or more. Each of them had told several others. Doronin’s
“secret” became the property of nearly half the institute’s inhabitants, and
people talked about it almost openly in their living quarters. Yet not a single
stoolie—and there was one to every five or six men in the sharashka—had
heard anything, or at any rate no one had reported it. The most observant, the
keenest scented of them, archstoolie Artur Siromakha, had himself heard
nothing until today!
He felt now that his honor as an informant was at stake. The godfathers,
sitting in their offices, might miss a trick, but that he should. . . . He was in
imminent danger of inclusion in the transfer list, just like the others. Doronin
had proved to be a nimble foe. Siromakha must hit back just as swiftly. (He
had not yet realized the scale of the disaster. He thought that Doronin had
shown his hand only that day or the day before.)
But Siromakha could not go bursting into people’s offices. He must not lose
his head and pound Shikin’s door or even hurry up to it too frequently. Those
lining up to see Myshin were turned away when the three o’clock bell rang.
The most importunate zeks argued with the man on duty in the staff hallway,
and Siromakha, clutching his belly as if in pain, approached the medical
orderly and stood waiting for the group to disperse. Dyrsin was called into
Myshin’s office. Siromakha assumed that there was nothing to keep him there,
but the interview seemed never-ending. Risking Mamurin’s displeasure—he
had missed an hour’s work in Number Seven, where the air was thick with the
fumes of soldering irons, rosin, and plan talk—Siromakha waited for Myshin
to dismiss Dyrsin. Waited in vain.
He must not give the game away, even to the rank-and-file guards gawking at
him in the hallway. Losing patience, he went upstairs to Shikin’s office,
returned to Myshin’s hallway, then back upstairs again. At his last attempt he
was luckier. From the dark lobby outside Shikin’s office, he heard the
unmistakable rasping voice of the yardman through the door; no one else in the
sharashka spoke like that.
He immediately gave the secret knock. The door opened slightly, and Shikin
appeared in the aperture.
“It’s very urgent,” Siromakha whispered.
“Just a minute,” Shikin answered.
Siromakha walked briskly toward the far end of the hallway, in order to
avoid the yardman when he emerged, then hurried back and barged into
Shikin’s room without knocking.
* Doctors’ Plot: Stalin’s paranoid fantasy in the early 1950s that Jewish
doctors were conspiring to kill off the Soviet leaders by poisoning them.