Chapter-85-Prince-Kurbsky

THE CAPACITYFOR HEROIC DEEDS—for actions that make extreme demands on
a person’s strength—depends to a greater or lesser extent on willpower. Some
people are born heroes; others are not. The heroic acts that cost the greatest
effort are those performed spontaneously by sheer willpower. Such actions are
easier if they are the culmination of years of purposeful effort. And for the man
born a hero, great deeds are blessedly easy, as easy as breathing.
Ruska Doronin, for instance, had lived as an outlaw, a wanted man, sought
all over the Soviet Union, with the carefree smile of an innocent child. The
thrill of risk, the fever of adventure, must have been injected into his
bloodstream at birth.
Respectable Innokenty, fortunate Innokenty, could never have brought himself
to vanish and flit around the country under a false name. Arrest might be
imminent, but it would never enter his head that he could do anything to prevent
it.
He had made his telephone call to the embassy on impulse, without stopping
to think. His discovery had come as a surprise—and too late for him to wait
those few days until he arrived in New York. He had called like a man
possessed, although he knew that all telephones were bugged and that he was
one of the very few people in the ministry who knew Georgy Koval’s secret.
He had simply flung himself into the abyss because the thought that they could
brazenly steal the bomb and in a year’s time start brandishing it was
intolerable. But he had not been prepared for the shattering impact of the stony
bottom. He had cherished a wild hope that he could flutter out of it, escape
responsibility, fly across the ocean, get his breath back, and tell his story to the
press.
But even before he reached the bottom, he had relapsed into impotent
despair, spiritual exhaustion. His short-lived resolve had snapped, and terror
was consuming him like a flame.
He had felt it most acutely that Monday morning, when he had to force
himself to begin living again, to go to work, anxiously trying to detect
menacing changes in the looks and voices of those around him.
Still outwardly self-possessed, Innokenty was internally a wreck, incapable
of fighting back, of seeking a way out, of trying to escape.
It was not quite 11:00 a.m. when his boss’s secretary, denying him access,
informed Innokenty that his appointment—so she had heard—had been held up
by the vice minister.
This news, though not definite, came as such a shock that Innokenty did not
insist on being seen and seeking confirmation. But nothing else could explain
the delay, once his departure had been approved. The document accrediting
him to the United Nations already bore Vyshinsky’s stamp. He had obviously
been found out.
The world seemed to have become a darker place. His shoulders felt as if he
were carrying a yoke with two full pails. Back in his room, it was as much as
he could do to lock the door and remove the key so that they would think he
had left. He could do this only because the usual occupant of the other desk had
not returned from an official trip.
Innokenty’s insides had turned into a nauseous jelly. He waited for the knock.
He was terror-stricken. Any minute now they would come and arrest him. A
fleeting thought—Don’t open the door. Make them break it down.
Or hang yourself before they come in.
Or jump out of the window. From the third floor. Right into the street. Two
seconds in flight—and smash. Consciousness extinguished.
A thick stack of papers lay on the desk, the auditors’ estimate of Innokenty’s
debts. He had to check the account and return it before leaving for abroad. But
even the sight of it made him feel sick.
The heating was on, but he felt cold, shivery.
His feebleness disgusted him! He was passively awaiting his doom.
Innokenty lay flat, facedown, on the sofa. With the whole length of his body
pressed against the sofa, he got from it some support, a kind of reassurance.
His thoughts grew confused.
Was it really him? Could he really have had the nerve to telephone the
embassy? And if so, why? At the other end, someone speaking Russian with an
accent. “Call the Canadians. . . . Just who are you? How do I know you’re
telling the truth?” Those arrogant Americans! They’ll live to see their farmers
collectivized to a man. Serve them right.
Should never have called . . . sorry for myself . . . ending my life at thirty . . .
perhaps under torture. . . .
But no, he didn’t regret calling. It had to be done. It was as though someone
had been leading him, and he had felt no fear.
No, it wasn’t that he had no regrets; he no longer had the will to regret or not
to regret. As his sense of imminent danger faded, he lay still: hardly breathing,
hugging the sofa, wishing only that it would all end, that they would soon take
him away . . . or something.
But luckily no one knocked; no one tried the door. And the telephone did not
ring once.
He lost consciousness. Oppressive dreams, absurd dreams, pursued one
another, until his head was bursting and he awoke. Unrefreshed, indeed more
fatigued, feebler than before he had fallen asleep, exhausted by all the arrests
or attempted arrests he had undergone in his dreams. He was too weak to rise
from the sofa and shake off his nightmares or indeed to stir at all. Too weak to
resist the sickening drowsiness sucking him back into sleep.
He slept again at last, dead to the world. Slept with his mouth open, drooling
onto the sofa. The damp patch and the midmorning bustle in the hallway woke
him up.
He rose, unlocked the door, and went for a wash. They were bringing tea and
sandwiches around.
No one was about to arrest him. The colleagues he met in the hallway and the
main office behaved toward him as they always did.
This proved nothing. How could anyone else know?
But their unchanged looks and voices raised his spirits.
He asked the girl to bring him really hot, really strong tea and drank two
glasses of it with enjoyment. He felt his confidence growing.
But he still could not bring himself to insist on seeing the chief. To try to find
out. . . .
The sensible solution was obviously to do away with himself. He would
simply be obeying his instinct of self-preservation, sparing himself suffering.
But only if he knew for sure that they were going to arrest him.
Perhaps they weren’t?
The telephone rang. Innokenty jumped. His heart stood still, then began
beating quite audibly.
It was only Dotty. Dotty’s marvelously musical telephone voice. Dotty
talking like a wife reinstated in her conjugal rights. She asked how things were
and suggested going out somewhere that evening.
Once again Innokenty felt a glow of gratitude and affection. Bad wife or not,
she was closer to him than anyone.
He did not tell her that his posting might have been canceled. Instead, he
imagined himself in a theater that evening, perfectly safe; people weren’t
arrested in the theater in full view of the audience!
“All right, get tickets for something cheerful,” he said.
“The operetta, maybe? It’s something called Akulina. There’s nothing much
on otherwise. It’s The Law of Lycurgus at the little Red Army Theater and
Voice of America at the big one. The Arts is doing The Unforgettable.”
“Law of Lycurgus sounds too good to be true. The worst plays always get
great titles. Book for Akulina. And we’ll take in a restaurant after.”
“Okay! Okay!” Dotty laughed happily into the telephone.
(And stay there all night so they won’t find me at home! They always came in
the night, of course.)
Innokenty was gradually recovering his self-possession. What if he was
suspected? Shchevronok and Zavarzin were more familiar with the details than
he was; they must surely be the prime suspects. And, anyway, suspicion was
one thing, proof another.
Suppose I am in danger of arrest; there’s nothing I can do about it. Should I
be hiding things? There’s nothing to hide. So why worry?
By now he felt strong enough to pace the floor as he thought it over. Suppose
they are going to arrest me. It may not be today or even this week. So should I
stop living? Or should I spend my last few days enjoying myself like crazy?
Why had he panicked like that? Only last night, damn it, he had—oh, so
wittily—defended Epicurus. Why not follow his advice? His ideas seemed
sensible enough.
Thinking that he ought to look through his notebooks for entries best
suppressed, he remembered that he had once jotted down excerpts from
Epicurus. He found the place. “Our private feelings of satisfaction and
dissatisfaction are the ultimate criteria of good and evil,” he read.
That meant nothing to Innokenty in his present state of mind. He read on.
“Know that there is no such thing as immortality. Therefore, death is not an
evil; it is simply irrelevant to us. As long as we exist, there is no death, and
when death comes upon us, we do not exist.”
Well said! Innokenty leaned back in his chair. Who was it I recently heard
saying just that? Yes, of course, that young war veteran at the party last night.
Innokenty pictured to himself the garden in Athens. Epicurus, a swarthy
septuagenarian in a tunic, was holding forth from marble steps, while he,
Innokenty, in modern dress, perched on a pedestal, in a casual sort of American
pose, listened.
“Belief in immortality was born of the greed of insatiable people who
squander the time that nature has allotted us. But the wise man will find that
time sufficient to make the round of attainable delights and, when the time to
die arrives, leave the table of life replete, making way for other guests. For the
wise man one human span suffices, while the foolish man would not know
what to do even with eternity.”
Brilliant! But here’s the rub: What if you are dragged from the table not by
nature, in your seventies, but at thirty, by the Ministry of State Security?
“One should not fear physical suffering. He who knows the limits of suffering
is proof against fear. Prolonged suffering is always insignificant, while acute
suffering is never for long. The wise man will not lose his spiritual calm even
under torture. His memory will bring back to him his former sensual and
spiritual gratifications and, in spite of his present bodily suffering, will restore
his spiritual equilibrium.”
Innokenty began gloomily pacing the office floor.
That was what he dreaded, not actually dying but being arrested and
physically tortured.
Epicurus says you can rise above torture, does he? If only I had such strength
of character.
Innokenty knew only too well that he did not.
He would die without regret if he knew that people would someday learn that
there had been such a citizen of the world and that he had tried to save them
from nuclear war.
If the Communists got the atom bomb, the planet was doomed.
But they would shoot him like a dog in the dungeon and hide his case file
where it could never be found.
He threw back his head as a bird does to let water trickle down its taut
throat.
But no, the idea that they might tell the world about him was more painful
still. We are so befogged, he thought, that we cannot distinguish traitors from
friends. What was Prince Kurbsky?
* A traitor. And what was Ivan the
Terrible? The beloved father of his people.
But that Kurbsky had escaped his terrible ruler. Innokenty had not been so
lucky.
If he was exposed, his fellow countrymen would enthusiastically stone him!
How many would understand him? A thousand out of two hundred million if he
was lucky. How many remembered the rejection of the sensible Baruch plan:
Deny yourselves the atom bomb, and the American bombs will be put under
international lock and key? Above all, how did he have the audacity to decide
what his country should do when that right belonged to the Supreme Power
alone?
You prevented the Transformer of the World, the Forger of Happiness from
stealing the bomb? That means you denied the bomb to your motherland!
But what did the motherland want with it? What did the village of
Rozhdestvo want with it? That half-blind female dwarf? The old woman with
the dead chicken? The one-legged peasant in rags and tatters?
Who, of all the people in the village, would condemn him for that telephone
call? Individually, none of them would even understand the problem. But
should they be herded into a village meeting, they would vote unanimously to
condemn him.
They were short of roads, textiles, planks, glass. . . . Give them back their
milk, their bread, maybe even their church bells—but what good was the atom
bomb to them?
What vexed Innokenty most was that his telephone call might not have
prevented the theft after all.
The filigreed hands of the bronze clock pointed to 4:45.
It was getting dark.
* Prince Kurbsky: Andrei Kurbsky (1528-1583), an outstanding military leader
who came into prominence as a close friend of Tsar Ivan IV (“the Terrible”).
Kurbsky later denounced Ivan’s cruelties in a series of letters addressed to
Ivan, who responded with letters branding Kurbsky a traitor.