Chapter-35-Kissing-Is-Forbidden

THE TRUCK DETAILED to take the prisoners to their relatives broke down, and
there was some delay while new arrangements were made by telephone. When
Nerzhin was summoned from the Acoustics Laboratory at about 11:00 a.m., the
other six were there already, half frisked or well and truly frisked, and waiting
in a variety of postures, some slumped over the big table, some roaming
around beyond the dividing line. Standing on the line, by the wall, was
Lieutenant Colonel Klimentiev, erect, poised, and highly polished, a model
officer about to inspect a parade. His black handlebar mustache and his black
head gave off a powerful smell of eau de cologne.
He stood with his hands behind his back, apparently taking no interest in the
proceedings, but by his very presence compelling the guards to search
conscientiously.
At the dividing line Nerzhin walked into the outstretched arms of
Krasnogubenky, one of the most spiteful and captious of the guards, who asked
immediately: “What have you got in your pockets?”
Nerzhin had long ago stopped tumbling over himself to oblige, as newcomers
do when they first encounter guards and escort troops. He did not trouble to
answer and made no move to turn the pockets of his unfamiliar wool suit inside
out. He looked at Krasnogubenky as though he felt sleep coming on and held
his arms a few inches from his sides to let the guard dive into his pockets.
After five years in prison and many such precautionary searches, Nerzhin no
longer thought of it as an outrage, no longer felt as if dirty fingers were mauling
his lacerated heart. Now nothing done to his body could cloud his happiness.
Krasnogubenky opened the cigarette case, Potapov’s present, peered into the
mouthpieces of the cigarettes to see whether anything was concealed there,
poked a finger into the matchbox (there might be something under the matches),
made sure that nothing was sewn into the hems of the handkerchief—and that
was all he could find in Nerzhin’s pockets. Next, he thrust his hand between
Nerzhin’s vest and his unbuttoned jacket, and patted him all over, feeling for
anything that might have been tucked under the vest or between the vest and the
dickey. Then he squatted on his heels, clasped one of Nerzhin’s thighs in a tight
two-handed grip, slid his hands from top to bottom, then did the same with the
other leg. When Krasnogubenky squatted down, Nerzhin had a good view of
the engraver, who was nervously pacing, and guessed why he was agitated. He
had discovered in prison a talent for short-story writing. He wrote about life in
a German POW camp, about his cellmates, about his appearances in court.
With his wife’s help he had smuggled out a few stories. But could they be
shown to anyone outside? Even there they would have to be hidden. They
couldn’t be left inside either. And he would never be allowed to take the
smallest scrap of paper away with him. But some old man, a friend of the
family, had read them and let the author know through his wife that even in
Chekhov such consummate and eloquent skill was rarely encountered. This
appraisal had greatly encouraged the engraver.
He had, as usual, written a story in readiness for today’s visit—a magnificent
story, he believed. But at the very last moment, confronted by Krasnogubenky,
he lost his nerve, turned away, wadded up the bit of tracing paper on which the
story was written in microscopic script, and swallowed it. Now he was
suffering agonies of regret that he had eaten the story. Perhaps he could have
gotten away with it?
“Shoes off,” Krasnogubenky said to Nerzhin.
Nerzhin lifted one foot onto a stool, unlaced his shoe, and kicked it off
without looking where it landed, exposing a hole in his sock. Krasnogubenky
picked up the shoe, groped inside it, and flexed the sole. Nerzhin kicked off the
other shoe, with the same deadpan expression, and revealed another hole.
Perhaps because there were such big holes in those socks, Krasnogubenky did
not suspect that anything was hidden in them and did not ask Nerzhin to remove
them.
Nerzhin put his shoes back on. Krasnogubenky lit a cigarette.
The lieutenant colonel had winced when Nerzhin kicked his shoes off. It was
a deliberate show of disrespect to his guard. If he did not stand up for guards,
prisoners would soon be thumbing their noses at senior prison staff.
Klimentiev regretted his act of kindness yet again and almost decided to find
some excuse for canceling Nerzhin’s visit; the wretch was obviously
unashamed of his criminal status and indeed seemed to revel in it.
“Pay attention!” he said sternly, and seven prisoners and seven guards turned
to look at him. “You know the rules? You must give nothing to your relatives.
You must receive nothing from them. Parcels may be handed over only through
me. In your conversation you must not mention your jobs here, your working
conditions, your living conditions, your daily routine, the layout of the plant.
You are not to mention names. About yourselves you may say only that all is
well with you and that there is nothing you need.”
“So what are we supposed to talk about?” someone called out. “Politics?”
Klimentiev did not trouble to answer this blatant absurdity.
“About your crime,” another prisoner grimly suggested. “And how sorry you
are.”
Klimentiev imperturbably rejected this.
“Talking about your case is also forbidden. Judicial proceedings are an
official secret. Inquire about your family, your children. One more thing.
Starting today, shaking hands and kissing are forbidden.”
Nerzhin, who had been unmoved by the search and the stupid rules, which he
knew how to circumvent, saw red when he heard that kissing was prohibited.
“We see each other just once a year. . . ,” he croaked, and Klimentiev looked
around, joyfully anticipating the continuation of his outburst.
Nerzhin could almost hear him barking, “Permission for visit withdrawn.”
He choked back his anger.
He had been given permission to receive a visit at the very last moment. It
seemed somehow irregular and might easily be withdrawn.
Some such thought generally prevents people from blurting out the truth or
demanding justice.
He was a veteran prisoner and should be able to control his anger.
Once the threat of mutiny had subsided, Klimentiev added dispassionately:
“If there is any kissing or handshaking, the visit will be terminated
immediately.”
“But my wife doesn’t know that!” the engraver said angrily.
Klimentiev was ready for this. “Your relatives will be warned,” he said.
“It never used to be like this!”
“Well, this is how it’s going to be now.”
Idiots! And their indignation was idiotic. As if he personally, and not fresh
instructions from above, were responsible for this procedure.
“How long will the visit last?”
“What if my mother comes? Will she be allowed in?”
“Each visit will last thirty minutes. I will admit only one person, the one
previously notified.”
“What about my five-year-old daughter?”
“Children under the age of fifteen are allowed in with adults.”
“What about sixteen-year-olds?”
“They won’t be admitted. Any questions? Time to get on the bus. This way
out!”
Amazing! They were being taken not in a prison truck, as they always had
been of late, but in a small-size, light blue city bus.
The bus was standing at the door of the staff building. Three guards, new
ones apparently, in civilian dress and velour hats and keeping their hands in
their pockets (on their revolvers), got on the bus first and occupied three of the
corners. Two of them looked like retired prizefighters or perhaps gangsters.
They were wearing very nice overcoats.
The morning frost was vanishing, but the thaw had not yet set in.
The seven prisoners stepped onto the bus by way of the only door, at the
front, and took their seats.
Four uniformed guards followed.
The driver slammed the door and started the engine.
Lieutenant Colonel Klimentiev got into his car.