Chapter-04-A-Protestant-Christmas

THE CHRISTMAS TREE was a pine twig stuck in a crack in the top of a stool. A
multicolored string of low-wattage bulbs was wound around it twice. Milk
white vinyl-covered wires connected them to an accumulator on the floor.
The stool stood in a corner of the room, in the passage between two double
bunks. The mattress from one of the upper bunks screened the whole corner
and the tiny Christmas tree from the glare of the overhead lights.
Six men in thick dark blue denims, of the sort worn by parachutists, had taken
their stand by the tree and were listening gravely, heads bowed, as one of their
number, brisk Max Adam, said a Protestant Christmas prayer.
There was no one else in the whole large room, which was densely furnished
with identical double bunks, welded together by the frames. After supper and
an hour to stretch their legs, all the others had gone to work the evening shift.
Max finished his prayer, and all six sat down. Five of them were
overwhelmed by bittersweet nostalgia for their homeland—their beloved,
orderly, and reliable Germany, under whose tiled roofs this first festival of the
year was so joyous and so moving. The sixth, a big man with a bushy black
beard, was a Jew and a Communist.
Fate had intertwined Lev Rubin’s fortunes with those of Germany, in peace
and war.
In peacetime he had been an expert on the German language; he spoke
impeccable modern Hoch Deutsch, but could when necessary have recourse to
several dialects. Every German who had ever put his name to a published
work he remembered as effortlessly as if he had been a personal acquaintance.
He spoke of little towns on the Rhine as though he had often strolled about
their well-washed shady streets.
In fact, he had been only in Prussia, and only with the army.
As a major in the Department of Psychological Warfare, he had singled out in
prisoner-of-war camps Germans reluctant to remain behind barbed wire and
willing to assist him. He carried them off and housed them comfortably in a
special school. Some of them would be passed back through the lines equipped
with TNT and forged reichsmarks, leave passes, and army paybooks. They
might blow up bridges, or they might just roll on home and enjoy themselves
until they were caught. With others he talked about Goethe and Schiller and
discussed the broadcasts they would make through megaphones, urging their
brothers-in-arms to turn their weapons against Hitler. Some of his
collaborators with a flair for ideology found it particularly easy to switch from
Nazism to Communism, and they were transferred in due course to various
“Free German Committees,” where they prepared themselves for the socialist
Germany of the future. The simple soldiers among them—and Rubin himself
with them—by the end of the war had twice crossed the ruptured front lines
and taken fortified positions by force of persuasion, so as to save Soviet
manpower.
But in his efforts to convert Germans, he had inevitably begun to feel close to
them, gotten to like them, and, once Germany was prostrate, to pity them. That
was what had landed Rubin in prison. His enemies in the administration
accused him of speaking out against the slogan “Blood for blood, a death for a
death” after the offensive of January 1945.
It was more or less true. Rubin did not try to refute it. It was infinitely more
complicated than it might appear from a newspaper report or the wording of
the charge against him.
By the stool with the illuminated Christmas tree, two lockers had been
pushed together to serve as a table. They began serving one another. There was
canned fish (prisoners in the sharashka were allowed to make purchases from
Moscow shops), there was lukewarm coffee, and there was homemade cake.
The conversation was sober and subdued. Max steered it onto peaceful
subjects: old folk customs, sentimental Christmas Eve stories. Alfred, the
bespectacled Viennese physics student whose course had been interrupted by
the war, spoke with a comical Austrian accent. Gustav, a moonfaced youngster
with a piglet’s pink transparent ears, stared wide-eyed at the Christmas lights,
scarcely daring to join in the conversation of his elders. (A member of the
Hitler Jugend, he had become a prisoner of war one week after the war ended.)
The conversation, however, took a wrong turn. Somebody mentioned
Christmas 1944, five years back, and the Ardennes offensive. The Germans, to
a man, were proud of this glorious piece of ancient history: The vanquished
had routed the victors. And they remembered how on that Christmas Eve
Germany had listened to Goebbels.
Rubin, one hand toying with a strand of his bristly black beard, confirmed
what they said. He remembered that speech. It had been a great success.
Goebbels had spoken as though it cost him a great mental effort, as though he
bore on his own shoulders all the burdens that were bringing Germany to its
knees. He probably had already a presentiment of his own end.
SS Obersturmbannführer Simmel, whose long body could scarcely fit in
between the table and the double bunk, did not appreciate Rubin’s politeness.
He couldn’t bear the idea that this Jew would dare to express any opinion of
Goebbels at all. He would never have demeaned himself by sitting at the same
table with Rubin if he had felt able to forgo Christmas Eve with his
compatriots. But the other Germans were all insistent that Rubin should be
there. For this little group of German exiles, storm blown into the gilded cage
of a sharashka in the heart of barbarous and chaotic Muscovy, there was only
one person with whom they felt any kinship, only one they understood: this
major in the enemy’s army, who had spent the whole war sowing the seeds of
discord and moral collapse among them. Only he could make comprehensible
the customs and mentality of the natives, advise on behavior, and translate the
latest international news from Russian.
Casting around for a remark that would really sting Rubin, Simmel said that,
anyway, there were hundreds of pyrotechnic orators in Germany—why, he
wondered, was it the rule with the Bolsheviks to read out speeches submitted
for approval beforehand?
The taunt was all the more hurtful for being justified. There was no point in
trying to explain to an enemy and a murderer that oratory, wonderful oratory,
had once existed in Russia but that Party Committees had stamped it out. Rubin
felt only disgust for Simmel, nothing more. He remembered Simmel’s arrival in
the sharashka after years in Butyrki Prison, wearing a creaking leather tunic:
There were still marks on the sleeve where the insignia of the SS (the civilian
SS, the worst of the lot) had been picked off. Even prison had not softened the
expression of hardened cruelty on Simmel’s face. Simmel was the reason why
Rubin had not wanted to come to tonight’s supper party. But the others had
begged him so earnestly, and he felt so sorry for them, lost and lonely as they
were, that he could not cast a cloud on their celebration by refusing.
Rubin suppressed his urge to explode and translated into German Pushkin’s
advice not to judge a shoe by its uppers.
Max mildly interrupted what might have developed into a quarrel with his
own version of a dubiously relevant line from Pushkin. Under Lev’s guidance,
he said, he could now spell out poems by Pushkin in the original. But why
hadn’t Reinhold taken any whipped cream with his cake? Where, though, had
Lev been that Christmas Eve? Lev recalled that he had been in his dugout near
Rozhan in the Narev bridgehead.
And just as the five Germans recalled their torn and trampled Germany,
piously painting it in the brightest colors, Rubin, too, found vivid memories
returning of the Narev bridgehead, then of the sodden forests along the Ilmen.
The Christmas tree lights were reflected in moist eyes.
As usual, they asked Rubin for the latest news. But he would have felt
awkward offering a review of the past month. He could not let himself become
a neutral purveyor of information, could not give up hope of reeducating these
people. Yet he could not convince them that in our complicated age socialist
truth sometimes forces its way forward by a tortuous path. All he could do was
to select for them, as he did for History (and, without realizing it, for himself),
only those current events that confirmed that the high road had been accurately
predicted, ignoring those that seemed likely to divert it into a quagmire. But
December had been a month in which, apart from the Sino-Soviet negotiations
and the Boss’s seventieth birthday, nothing positive seemed to have happened.
He would feel ashamed—and it would serve no educational purpose—to tell
the Germans about Traicho Kostov’s trial, at which the foreign correspondents
had been confronted rather late in the day with a sham recantation, allegedly
written by Kostov in his death cell, so that the whole crude judicial farce had
come apart at the seams.
On this occasion, Rubin dwelled mostly on the historic victory of the
Chinese Communists. The amiable Max listened to Rubin and nodded
encouragement. His eyes were guileless. He was attached to Rubin but, since
the Berlin blockade, had begun to distrust much of what he said, and (unknown
to Rubin) in the shortwave lab where he worked, he had occasionally risked
his neck by assembling, listening to, and then dismantling a miniature receiver
that looked nothing at all like a receiver. He had heard, from Cologne and on
the German service of the BBC, not only how Kostov had retracted the selfincriminating
statements that his interrogators had obtained by torture but also
about the consolidation of the Atlantic alliance and the new prosperity of West
Germany. He had, of course, passed all this on to the other Germans, and they
lived for the day when Adenauer would free them.
Still, they nodded politely as Rubin talked.
Anyway, it was high time for him to be gone; he had not been released from
the evening shift. He praised the cake (Hildemuth, the fitter, bowed in
gratification) and asked the company to excuse him. His hosts politely delayed
his departure; then they thanked him for coming, and he thanked them for having
him. After which the Germans settled down to sing Christmas carols sotto
voce.
Just as he was, with a Mongolian-Finnish dictionary and a slim volume of
Hemingway in English under his arm, Rubin went out into the hallway. The
hallway was broad, with an unpainted and scuffed wooden floor. There were
no windows, and the electric light was on day and night. It was the same
hallway in which, during the supper break an hour earlier, other lovers of
novelty had interviewed the new zeks fresh from the camps. Of the doors along
the hallway, one opened onto the inner prison stairway, and several others
belonged to “room-cells.” They were “rooms” because the doors had no locks,
but they were also “cells” because spy holes, little glass windows, had been
set in the doors. The guards here had no use for these peepholes, but they had
been adopted in accordance with the regulations for real prisons, simply
because the name given to the sharashka in official documents was “Ministry
of State Special Prison No. 1.”
Through one such peephole could be seen a Christmas Eve party like the one
he had left, for the Latvian fraternity, who had also been given time off.
All the other zeks were at work, and Rubin was worried that he might be
stopped at the exit and dragged off to the security officer to give an explanation
in writing. At both ends of the hallway there were doors that filled its whole
width: At one end a wooden four-paneled folding door under a semicircular
arch led to what had once been the sanctuary of the seminary’s church, and was
now also a “room-cell.” At the other there was a locked two-panel door
reinforced from top to bottom with sheet iron. This door, which led to their
place of work, the prisoners called the “royal gates.”
Rubin walked up to the iron door and knocked on the Judas window. A
guard’s face pressed against the glass on the other side.
The key turned quietly in the lock. As luck would have it, the guard was
easygoing.
Rubin went out onto the grand stairway of the ancient structure, crossed the
marble landing, walked past two ornate wrought-iron lamps, which no longer
gave light. Still on the second story, he entered a hallway and pushed open a
door marked “Acoustics Laboratory.”