Chapter-86-No-Fisher-of-Men

IN THE TWILIGHT a long black Zim passed through the wide-open guardhouse
gates, accelerated around the asphalted bends of the Marfino Institute’s yard,
cleared of snow by Spiridon’s broad shovel and black again after the thaw,
rounded Yakonov’s Pobeda, and pulled up sharply before the institute’s stone
portals.
The major general’s adjutant bounded out of the front seat and briskly opened
the rear door. Pudgy Foma Oskolupov, in a blue-gray overcoat too tight for him
and a general’s astrakhan hat, braced himself, waited for the adjutant to fling
wide the outer and inner doors of the institute, and made his way upstairs. He
looked preoccupied. Behind the antique standard lamps on the first landing, a
space had been partitioned off to serve as a cloakroom. The woman in charge
hurried out, as if to take the general’s overcoat, though she knew very well that
he would not surrender it. He did not, nor did he remove his hat, but went on
up one flight of the divided stairway. Prisoners and female free workers using
the stairs vanished in a hurry. The general in the astrakhan hat did his best to
preserve his dignity while ascending with the haste that the circumstances
demanded. The adjutant left his own coat in the cloakroom and caught up.
“Find Roitman,” the general said over his shoulder. “Warn him that I will be
with the new group in half an hour, expecting results.”
On the third floor he did not head for Yakonov’s office but went in the
opposite direction, toward Number Seven. The duty officer caught sight of his
back and glued himself to the phone, trying to locate Yakonov and warn him.
Number Seven was in a state of collapse. It didn’t take an expert (which
Oskolupov certainly was not) to realize that nothing was working, that all the
systems rigged up after months and months of trial and error had been torn
down, wrenched apart, wrecked. The wedding of the clipper to the scrambler
had begun with the dismantling of the bridal pair—panel by panel, block by
block, almost condenser by condenser. There was smoke in the air from
soldering irons and cigarettes. A hand drill buzzed. Men were arguing over
their work. Mamurin was yelling hysterically into his telephone.
In spite of the smoke and din, two men noticed the major general’s arrival.
Lyubimichev and Siromakha always kept half a wary eye on the entrance. They
were not separate persons but indefatigable, self-immolating mates,
unswervingly loyal, eager to serve, ready to work twenty-four hours a day and
give ear to all the weighty thoughts of authority. When Number Seven’s
engineers conferred, Lyubimichev and Siromakha joined in as equals. (They
had, in fact, learned a good deal in the hustle and bustle of Number Seven.)
When they spotted Oskolupov, they put their soldering irons down in a hurry;
Siromakha rushed to warn Mamurin, who was on his feet shouting into the
telephone, while Lyubimichev, out of the goodness of his heart, seized his
boss’s easy chair and hurried on tiptoes toward the general, looking for
instructions where to put it. In another man this might have seemed like
toadying, but in lofty, broad-shouldered Lyubimichev, with his amiably
ingenuous look, it was the homage of youth to an esteemed elderly person.
Setting the chair down and shielding it from everyone except Oskolupov,
Lyubimichev flicked imaginary dust from the seat, observed only by the major
general, and stepped briskly to one side. There he and Siromakha stood stockstill,
in eager anticipation of questions and instructions.
Oskolupov sat down. He kept his tall fur hat on but undid one button of his
overcoat.
The laboratory was suddenly silent. The drill stopped whirring; cigarettes
went out; voices were hushed. All that could be heard was Bobynin, still in his
den, booming instructions to the electricians, and Pryanchikov, lost to reason,
still wandering around the wreckage of his scrambler with a hot soldering iron
in his hand. The others looked on and waited for their superior to speak.
Mopping his brow after his difficult telephone conversation (arguing with the
head of the engineering workshops—they had bashed the prefab panels too
hard), Mamurin approached and exhaustedly greeted his former workmate,
now elevated to heights that he himself would never reach. Oskolupov
extended three fingers. Mamurin had become so pale and wan that it seemed a
crime to allow a man in such a state out of bed. The blows of the last twentyfour
hours—the minister’s anger and the shattered clipper—had hit him harder
than his high-ranking colleagues. The muscles under his skin were wire-drawn.
If a man’s bones can lose weight, Mamurin’s had. For more than a year he had
lived for the clipper, believed that the clipper, like the Little Humpbacked
Horse in the fable, would carry him to safety. No attempt to gloss over the
disaster, not even Pryanchikov’s arrival under Number Seven’s roof with his
scrambler, could conceal the catastrophe from him.
Oskolupov knew how to direct an operation without understanding it. He had
learned long ago that all you need do is provoke an argument between
knowledgeable subordinates. That was what he did now. He frowned at them
and said, “Well, then, how’s it going?” compelling his subordinates to speak
out.
It was the beginning of a pointless, boring discussion that merely interrupted
their work. They spoke reluctantly, sighing, and whenever two of them started
speaking at once, both gave way.
The two keynotes of this discussion were “we must” and “it’s difficult.” The
“must” theme was developed by the frenzied Markushev, supported by
Lyubimichev and Siromakha. Short, pimply, energetic Markushev spent day
and night feverishly devising ways of distinguishing himself and earning
remission of sentence. He had suggested combining the clipper and the
scrambler, not because as an engineer he was sure that it would work but
because Bobynin and Pryanchikov would become less and he himself more
important. Much as he disliked working “for love,” with no hope of enjoying
the fruits of his work, he now felt indignant with his despondent colleagues.
For Oskolupov’s benefit he hinted that the engineers were not pulling their
weight.
He was “only human”—one of that widely disseminated breed that creates
oppressors in its own likeness.
Grief for the past and faith in the future were written all over Lyubimichev’s
and Siromakha’s faces.
Mamurin lowered his translucent yellowish face into his fleshless hands and,
for the first time since he had been in command of Number Seven, remained
silent.
Khorobrov could scarcely conceal the malicious glint in his eyes. He was
overjoyed to be witnessing the burial of two years of endeavor by the Ministry
of State Security. He had always been readier than any of them to contradict
Markushev and exaggerate difficulties.
Oskolupov, for some reason, was particularly critical of Dyrsin, accusing
him of lack of enthusiasm. When Dyrsin was agitated or hurt by unfairness, his
voice almost failed him. Because of this handicap, he was always found guilty.
Yakonov came in while they were talking and out of politeness contributed to
a discussion that made no sense in Oskolupov’s presence. Then he called
Markushev over and balanced a scrap of paper on his knee, so that they could
hastily sketch an alternative scheme.
Oskolupov would have liked more than anything to tear into them and bawl
them out: He had perfected his technique to the finest nuances of intonation
during his years in authority. This was what he was best at. But he saw that
right now it would not be helpful.
Oskolupov may have felt that his conference was getting nowhere, or he may
have suddenly felt like a change of air before his fateful month of grace ended.
Whatever the reason, he rose while Bulatov was still talking, made for the exit,
looking grim, and left the whole staff of Number Seven to agonize over the
predicament in which their slackness had landed the head of the Department of
Special Technology.
Protocol compelled Yakonov to rise with his superior and carry his fleshy
bulk after the astrakhan hat, which just reached to Yakonov’s shoulder. They
walked along the hallway in silence, but now side by side. The departmental
director did not like his chief engineer walking beside him. Yakonov was taller
by a head—and a towering head at that.
It was now Yakonov’s duty—and it could even be to his advantage—to tell
the major general about the amazing, unexpected success with the encoder.
Ever since Abakumov’s late-night reception, Oskolupov had glared at him like
a maddened bull. This good news would clear the air.
Only . . . the drawing was not in his hands. Sologdin’s remarkable selfpossession,
his convincing show of readiness to go to his death rather than
surrender the drawing gratis, had persuaded Yakonov to keep his word; he
would bypass Oskolupov and report to Selivanovsky that night. Oskolupov
would be furious, but he would have to calm down quickly.
Moreover, seeing Oskolupov so downcast, so fearful for his future, Yakonov
enjoyed leaving him to agonize for a few days longer. The engineer in Yakonov
felt a sort of painful concern for the project, as though he had devised it
himself; and just as Sologdin had foreseen, Oskolupov would inevitably
muscle in and claim coauthorship. The moment he heard the news, without so
much as a glance at the drawing, he would move Sologdin to a separate room
and try to keep out those who should be helping him. He would send for
Sologdin, browbeat him, set impossible completion duties, call up every other
hour from the ministry to hurry Yakonov along. And he would end with the
vainglorious conviction that only his close supervision had set the encoder on
the right lines.
All this was so sickeningly obvious that Yakonov was happy to say nothing
for the moment.
Once in his office, he did, however, help Oskolupov off with his overcoat,
something he would never have done with others present.
“What’s your Gerasimovich doing?” Oskolupov asked, sitting down on
Yakonov’s armchair without even removing his hat.
Yakonov sank onto a visitor’s chair.
“Gerasimovich? You mean when did he get back from Spiridonovka? In
October, I think it was. Since then, he’s been working on a television set for
Comrade Stalin.”
(The one with a bronze plate reading “To Great Stalin from the Chekists.”)
“Call him in.”
Yakonov made the call.
“Spiridonovka” was another of the Moscow special prisons. Just recently, a
very clever and useful gadget had been produced there under engineer
Bobyor’s supervision—an attachment to an ordinary local telephone. What
was particularly clever about the device was that it worked precisely when the
telephone was not working; as long as the receiver was reposing in its cradle,
everything said in the room could be monitored by the security services’
control point. The device found favor and was put into production. When a
suitable subscriber was identified, his line was cut, and the victim himself
called in a repairman who pretended to be mending the phone and bugged it.
The forward thinking of the authorities (the authorities must always be
thinking ahead) was now focused on other gadgets.
An orderly looked in at the door: “The prisoner Gerasimovich.”
“Send him in,” said Yakonov. He was sitting on a small chair, exiled from his
desk, numb, and in danger of toppling over to right or left.
Gerasimovich came in, catching his foot on the strip of carpet as he adjusted
his pince-nez. Confronted with these two heavyweights, he looked smaller and
narrower in the shoulders than ever.
“You sent for me,” he said, moving forward and looking between Oskolupov
and Yakonov at the wall beyond.
“Uh-huh,” Oskolupov replied. “Sit down.”
Gerasimovich sat. He took up only half a chair.
“You’re . . . let’s see”—Oskolupov searched his memory—“You’re . . . an
optician, aren’t you, Gerasimovich? More of an eye man than an ear man,
right?”
“Yes.”
“And you . . . er”—he rolled his tongue as if licking his teeth clean—“seem
to be well thought of.”
He paused. Screwing up one eye, he looked hard at Gerasimovich with the
other.
“Do you know Bobyor’s work?”
“I’ve heard about it.”
“Uh-huh. And you’ve heard that we’ve recommended Bobyor for early
release?”
“I didn’t know that.”
“Well, now you do. How long have you got left?”
“Three years.”
“Tha-at long!” Oskolupov sounded surprised, as if all his prisoners were in
for just a month or two. “Dear me, that is a long time.” (He had recently
cheered up one newcomer by telling him that ten years was . . . “a flea bite.
Some men are inside for twenty-five.”)
“I daresay you wouldn’t mind earning remission yourself?”
A strange coincidence, Gerasimovich thought, so soon after Natasha’s plea
yesterday.
He steeled himself. He never allowed himself to smile or make any
concession when talking to the bosses.
“How would I get it? You don’t find it lying around in the hallway.”
Oskolupov rocked back in his chair.
“Television sets won’t get you remission, of course. But what if I transfer
you to Spiridonovka in a day or two and put you in charge of a project? You
can get it done in six months and be home this autumn.”
“What sort of work, if I may ask?”
“We’ve got lots of work lined up there; you can take your pick. Here’s one
idea: planting microphones in park benches. People jabber away regardless in
those places; it’s amazing what you hear. But maybe that’s not in your line?”
“No, that isn’t in my line.”
“But we’ve got something for you, too, I’m sure. Two jobs—both important,
both urgent. And both right up your alley, am I right, Anton Nikolaich?”
(Yakonov nodded confirmation.)
“One is a night camera using those . . . what d’you call them . . . ultrared
rays. So you can photograph a man at night in the street, see who he’s with, and
he’ll never know till his dying day. They’ve produced rough drafts abroad; all
that’s needed is . . . creative copying. And making the apparatus simpler to
handle. Our agents aren’t as clever as you. The second thing is small potatoes,
but we need it urgently. A simple camera, but so tiny it can be fitted into a
doorpost. So that as soon as the door opens, it will photograph whoever goes
in or out. In the daytime or with electric lights on. Never mind in the dark, that
doesn’t matter. This is another little gadget we would like to put into
production. What do you say? Will you take it on?”
Gerasimovich’s pinched face was turned toward the window. He did not
look at the major general.
The word “doleful” was not in Oskolupov’s vocabulary, so he could not
have defined the fixed expression on the prisoner’s face.
He had no wish to. He was waiting for a reply.
Natasha’s prayer had been heard! In his mind’s eye, Illarion saw her
bloodless face, her eyes glassy with unshed tears.
For the first time in all those years, going home was a possibility within his
grasp. His heart was aglow.
All he had to do was what Bobyor had done: Make room behind the wire for
a couple of unsuspecting mugs from outside.
“Couldn’t I . . . couldn’t I just stay on television?” Gerasimovich stammered.
“Are you refusing?”
Oskolupov frowned in surprise. That angry look was never long absent from
his features.
“For what reason?”
All the laws of the cruel prison world told Gerasimovich that taking pity on
comfortable know-nothings, enjoying their freedom without a care in the
world, was as eccentric as not killing pigs for fatback. The mugs outside did
not have immortal souls. Zeks earned them the hard way, serving their neverending
sentences. Outside, men used the liberty allowed them selfishly and
stupidly, mired in their petty schemes and futile endeavors.
But Natasha was his helpmate for life. She had been waiting while he served
his second term. She was a feeble little thing, fading fast, and his own life
would flicker out with hers.
“Do I need reasons?” he answered in a faint voice. “I just can’t do it. I
couldn’t cope.”
Yakonov, whose mind had been wandering, now looked closely at
Gerasimovich. Another one determined to defy common sense, he thought. But
the universal rule—“look out for number one”—would surely operate here,
too.
Oskolupov tried persuasion.
“You just aren’t used to serious assignments anymore, so you’re a bit afraid
of them. But if you can’t manage it, who can? All right, I’ll let you think it
over.”
Gerasimovich rested his brow on his small hand and said nothing.
After all, it wasn’t the atom bomb. In the scale of world events, it was an
imperceptibly minute detail.
“But what is there to think about? This is just the sort of thing you’ve been
trained to do.”
Why not just keep quiet! Fool them! Take the job on, spin it out, get nothing
done. But Gerasimovich rose, looked contemptuously at the barrel-bellied,
flabby-cheeked, pig-faced degenerate wearing a general’s hat, and said in a
ringing voice: “No! It isn’t what I was trained to do! Putting people in prison
isn’t my trade! I am no fisher of men! It’s enough that we’ve been imprisoned
ourselves. . . .”