Chapter-33-Penalty-Marks

STILL EXULTING, Sologdin flung open the door with excessive force and went
into the design office. But instead of the crowd he expected to find in this big
room that was always abuzz, he saw a solitary plump female form over by the
window.
“Alone, Larisa Nikolaevna?” he asked in surprise, striding across the room.
The copyist Larisa Nikolaevna Yemina, a woman of thirty, looked around
from her drawing board by the window and smiled over her shoulder at
Sologdin as he approached.
“It’s you, Dmitri Aleksandrovich. I was beginning to think I was in for a
whole boring day by myself.”
Sologdin surveyed the overgenerous figure in the bright green knitted outfit—
knitted skirt and knitted top—stepped briskly over to his desk without
answering, and, before sitting down, made a mark on a sheet of pink paper
lying by itself. After this, standing almost with his back to Yemina, he pinned
the drawing he had brought to his adjustable drawing board.
The design office was a light and spacious room on the third floor with big
windows facing south and ten such drawing boards—some horizontal, some
inclined, some almost vertical—placed among the normal office desks.
Sologdin’s board, near the far window at which Yemina sat, was set up
vertically and swung to an angle at which Sologdin was screened from the
head of the office and the entrance, while daylight fell directly on the drawings
pinned there.
After some time Sologdin asked curtly: “Where are they all?”
“I was going to ask you that,” Yemina trilled.
He shot her a quick glance, moving only his head, and said sarcastically,
“All I can tell you is where the four unpersons who work in this room are.
Make the most of it. One of them has been taken to see a visitor. Hugo
Leonardovich has got his Latvian Christmas party. I’m here, and Ivan
Ivanovich has begged off to darn his socks. What I would like to know in
return is where our sixteen free, and so much more important, comrades are.”
He was standing in profile to Yemina, and she could see the condescending
smile between his neat little mustache and his neat goatee.
“You mean you don’t know that our major arranged with Anton Nikolaevich
last night to give the design office a day off? Just my bad luck to be duty
officer.”
Sologdin frowned. “A day off? In honor of what?”
“Because it’s Sunday, of course.”
“Since when has Sunday been a nonworking day around here?”
“Well, the major said we have no urgent work at the moment.”
Sologdin spun around to face her squarely.
“We have no urgent work?” he exclaimed almost angrily. “I like that! We
have no urgent work!” Sologdin’s pink lips twisted in an impatient grimace.
“Would you like me to see to it that all sixteen of you sit here copying day and
night from tomorrow onward? What do you say to that? All sixteen!” His voice
rose to a shout of malicious glee.
Unmoved by the awful prospect of days and nights at the drawing board,
Yemina preserved the calm that went so well with her placid large-scale
beauty. That morning she hadn’t even picked up the tracing paper that lay
across her slightly inclined board. The key with which she had let herself in
still lay on it. Propping herself comfortably against the desk (her knitted
sleeve, pulled taut, emphasized the rounded fullness of her upper arm), Yemina
rocked herself very gently and gazed at Sologdin with big, friendly eyes.
“God forbid! Are you really capable of anything so wicked?”
Sologdin stared at her coldly and asked: “Why do you use the word God?
Aren’t you the wife of a Chekist?”
“What of it?” She sounded surprised. “We bake Easter cakes, too. So what?”
“Easter cakes?”
“That’s what I said!”
Sologdin gazed down at the seated Yemina. The green of her knitted twopiece
attire was vivid, audacious. Skirt and jacket hugged and emphasized the
lines of her opulent figure. The jacket was unbuttoned at the neck, and the
collar of a flimsy white blouse was turned out over it.
Sologdin made a check on the sheet of pink paper and said aggressively: “I
thought you said your husband was a lieutenant colonel in the MGB?”
“Well, that’s my husband! But me and my mother are . . . well . . . just
women!”
She smiled disarmingly. Her thick flaxen braids were wound into an
imposing crown around her head. She smiled and was indeed like a peasant
woman—as portrayed by a great actress.
Sologdin said no more but sat sideways at his board, so as not to see
Yemina, and studied the drawing pinned to it, squinting. He felt as though he
was still sprinkled with the flowers of triumph, as though they still clung to his
shoulders and chest, and he did not want to dispel this blissful feeling.
He would, sometime, have to begin his real life, the Great Life.
And the time was now. He was at the very zenith.
Though there was still some lingering doubt. . . . Yes, that was it.
Insensitivity to low-energy impulses and the shortfall in spin momentum could
be taken care of, Sologdin felt instinctively, although of course he would have
to double check. But Chelnov’s last remark, about randomness becoming a
fixed pattern, was worrying. It did not imply that there was anything
intrinsically wrong with his work, only that it fell short of the ideal. At the
same time, he had a vague awareness that somewhere in his work there was an
imperfection, a neglected “final inch,” which Chelnov had not sensed and he
himself had not detected. It was important to locate it and start putting it right
in the course of this quiet Sunday that had come around just when he needed it.
Only then could he show his work to Anton and start using it to breach the
concrete walls.
He made an effort to shut Yemina out of his mind and concentrate on
Professor Chelnov’s suggestions. Yemina had been sitting near him for six
months, but they had never talked much. For that matter, they had never been
alone together. Sologdin occasionally teased her a bit when his schedule
allowed him a five-minute break. Her official position was that of copyist, so
that she was his subordinate, but socially she belonged to the ruling class. The
only natural and dignified relationship between them was enmity.
Sologdin looked at his drawing, and Yemina, still propped on her elbow and
swaying slightly, looked at him. Suddenly she asked in a loud voice: “Dmitri
Aleksandrovich! What about you? Who darns your socks?”
Sologdin’s eyebrows rose. He didn’t even understand.
“Socks?” He went on looking at his drawing. “Oh, I see. Ivan Ivanovich
wears socks because he’s still a new boy. Been in less than three years. Socks
are a relic of what they call”—compelled to use “bird language,” he choked on
the word—“capitalism. I just don’t wear socks!”
He made a mark on the white sheet.
“What do you wear, then?”
Sologdin couldn’t help smiling.
“You are overstepping the bounds of modesty, Larisa Nikolaevna. I wear that
proud article of Russian attire, the foot rag!”
He pronounced the words with relish, as though he was beginning to enjoy
the conversation. His sudden transitions from sternness to jest always alarmed
and amused Yemina.
“I thought it was soldiers who wore foot rags.”
“Soldiers and two other groups: prisoners and collective farmers.”
“Well, they have to be washed and mended, don’t they?”
“You’re mistaken! Who ever washes foot rags nowadays? People just wear
them for a year without washing them, then throw them away and ask the
authorities for new ones.”
“Do they really?” Yemina looked almost alarmed.
Sologdin burst into carefree youthful laughter.
“At any rate that’s one way of looking at it. And where would I get the cash
to buy socks? You’re an MGB tracing woman. How much do you get a month?”
“Fifteen hundred.”
“Aha!” Sologdin exclaimed triumphantly. “Whereas I, a fashioner of
things”—in the Language of Utter Clarity this meant “engineer”—“get thirty
little old rubles! Can you see me splurging on socks?”
Sologdin’s eyes twinkled merrily. It had nothing to do with Yemina, but she
glowed.
Larisa Nikolaevna’s husband was an oaf. His family had long ago become
nothing more to him than a soft cushion, and he was nothing more to his wife
than a piece of furniture. When he got home from work, he ate at length, with
great enjoyment, then slept. After his snooze he read the papers and twiddled
the knobs on the radio (he periodically sold his old set and bought one of the
latest make). A soccer match (true to his calling, he was a Dynamo fan) might
arouse some excitement and even passion in him, but nothing else could. He
was as dim and as dull as could be. The other men in her circle were much the
same: They spent their leisure boasting about their successes and their medals,
playing cards, drinking themselves purple, then drunkenly pestering and
pawing her. . . .
Sologdin fixed his eyes on his drawing again. Larisa Nikolaevna went on
staring at his face, eyeing his mustache, his beard, his full lips. . . .
She would have liked to rub her face against his prickly beard.
She broke the silence again. “Dmitri Aleksandrovich! Am I disturbing you?”
“Yes, you are a bit. . . ,” Sologdin answered. The “last few inches” required
deep and uninterrupted thought. But her proximity was distracting him. He
abandoned his drawing for the time being, turned around to his desk and
toward Yemina, and began looking through unimportant papers.
He could hear the faint tick of her wristwatch.
A group of people walked along the hallway, talking quietly. Mamurin’s
sibilant voice was raised in Number Seven, next door. “How long’s that
transformer going to be?” Followed by an irate shout from Markushev: “You
shouldn’t have let them have it, Yakov Ivanovich!”
Larisa Nikolaevna folded her arms on the desk before her, rested her chin on
them, and let her languishing gaze play on Sologdin.
Sologdin went on reading.
“Every day! Every hour!” She spoke reverently, almost in a whisper.
“Working so hard . . . in prison! You’re a remarkable man, Dmitri
Aleksandrovich!”
This observation brought Sologdin’s head up sharply.
“What has prison got to do with it, Larisa Nikolaevna! I’ve been inside since
I was twenty-five, and I’m supposed to get out when I’m forty-two. But I don’t
believe it. They’re sure to add another bit on. I will have spent the best part of
my life in the camps, the years when my powers are at their height. A man
shouldn’t knuckle under to external circumstances—that’s too humiliating.”
“You seem to do everything according to plan!”
“Whether he’s free or in prison, it makes no difference; man must cultivate
firmness of purpose and put it at the service of reason. I lived on nothing but
porridge for seven years in a camp, and my brainwork was done without sugar
or phosphorus. If I were to tell you. . . .”
But you had to have gone through it to understand it.
The camp’s interrogation cell was a hole scooped out of a hillside. The
godfather, Lieutenant Kamyshan, had spent eleven months preparing Sologdin
for his second sentence, a further tenner. He hit you on the lips with a stick, so
that you spat blood and teeth. On days when he rode into the camp on
horseback (he was an excellent rider), he would hit you with the handle of his
riding crop.
The war was still on. Even the free population had nothing to eat. And those
in the camps? Still less. What could you expect, then, in that cage in the
mountain?
Sologdin’s first interrogation had taught him his lesson, and this time he
signed nothing. He got the scheduled tenner just the same. He was taken
straight from the courtroom to the hospital. He was dying. His body was
doomed to disintegration; it would accept neither bread nor gruel nor porridge.
There came a day when they tipped him onto a stretcher and carried him off
to the morgue, where they would break his head open with a big wooden
mallet before carting him to the burial ground. But he had suddenly stirred. . . .
“Tell me about it!”
“No, Larisa Nikolaevna! It’s absolutely impossible to describe!” he assured
her.
He could say it easily, cheerfully now.
And from there, from that terrible place, thenceforth . . . what remarkable
powers of renewal he had! With all those years of captivity, all those years of
work behind him, to what heights had he soared!
“Please tell me about it!”
The well-nourished woman looked up at him imploringly, her head on her
folded arms.
There was one thing she might be able to understand: A woman had also
been involved in the story. Kamyshan had picked on him all the sooner because
he was jealous of Sologdin’s relations with a female prisoner, a nurse. And not
without reason. Sologdin’s body still glowed with gratitude when he thought of
her. It had almost been worth serving a second term for her sake. There was in
fact some resemblance between the nurse and this copyist. Both were as ripe
and plump as full ears of corn. Small, thin women were freaks as far as
Sologdin was concerned. Nature’s mistakes.
Yemina’s index finger, with its neatly manicured, pink-polished nail, toyed
idly with the crumpled corner of her tracing paper. Her head was almost
resting on her folded arms, so that the towering crown of thick braids was
turned toward Sologdin.
“I owe you a big apology, Dmitri Aleksandrovich. . . .”
“What for?”
“When I was standing by your desk once, I looked down and saw that you
were writing a letter. It was quite accidental; you know how it can happen.
Then there was another time—”
“When you, again quite by chance, took another squint. . . ?”
“And saw that you were writing a letter again, and it looked like the same
one.”
“What, you could even make out that it was the same one? What about the
third time? Was there a third time?”
“Yes.”
“So-o-o. . . . If this goes on, Larisa Nikolaevna, I will have to dispense with
your services as a copyist. Which would be a pity, because your drawing is not
at all bad.”
“But it was a long time ago. You haven’t written anything since.”
“But I dare say you immediately informed Major Shikinidi?”
“Why do you call him Shikinidi?”
“Shikin, then. Did you?”
“How could you think such a thing?”
“It doesn’t take much thought. Major Shikinidi must surely have given you the
job of spying on my actions, words, and even thoughts.” Sologdin took a pencil
and made a mark on the white sheet. “Didn’t he? Be honest!”
“Well . . . yes.”
“And how many bad reports have you put in?”
“Dmitri Aleksandrovich! On the contrary. I always give you the very best
reports!”
“Hmm . . . well, we’ll believe it for the time being. But my warning remains
in force. We obviously have here a harmless case of purely womanly curiosity.
I will satisfy it. It was back in September. I spent not three but five days on end
writing a letter to my wife.”
“That’s what I wanted to ask you, whether you have a wife. Is she waiting for
you? Do you always write her such long letters?”
“Yes, I have a wife,” Sologdin answered slowly and thoughtfully, “but I
might just as well not have one. I can’t even write to her now. When I did, they
weren’t long letters; it just took a long time getting them right. The art of letter
writing, Larisa Nikolaevna, is a very difficult one. We often write our letters
carelessly, and then we’re surprised when we lose people dear to us. My wife
hasn’t seen me, hasn’t felt the touch of my hand for many years now. Letters are
the only tie by which I’ve held on to her for the past twelve years.”
Yemina stirred. She slid her elbows to the edge of Sologdin’s desk and
propped herself up there, cupping her bold face in her hands.
“Are you sure you’re still holding on to her? And if so, why, Dmitri
Aleksandrovich? It’s been twelve years already, and there are still another five
left! Seventeen years! You’re robbing her of her youth! Why? Let her live!”
Sologdin said gravely: “There are, Larisa Nikolaevna, women of a special
kind. They are the consorts of Vikings, the bright-faced Isoldes with
adamantine souls. You cannot have known them; your life has been one of
comfortable stagnation.”
“Let her live!” Larisa Nikolaevna urged him.
She was no longer the grande dame who sailed so majestically along
hallways and up stairways in the sharashka. She sat clinging to Sologdin’s
desk. He heard her breathing loudly, saw her face flushed brightly with
concern for his wife, whom she had never met, and thought that now she did
indeed look almost like a peasant woman.
Sologdin looked at her quizzically. All women, he knew, were quick to spot
the male in the ascendant, to catch the scent of success. Every single one of
them craved the attention of the victor. Yemina could not possibly know about
his conversation with Chelnov, about the results of his work, but she had
somehow sensed it all. And she was beating her wings against the iron-meshed
barrier of discipline between them.
Sologdin peeked into the depths of her open-necked blouse and made a mark
on the pink sheet.
“Dmitri Aleksandrovich! That’s another thing. I’ve been tortured by curiosity
for several weeks now. What are those marks you keep making? And why do
you cross them out after a few days? What does it mean?”
“I’m afraid you’re showing your surveillance leanings again.” He took up the
white sheet. “But I don’t mind telling you. I make a mark here every time I use
a foreign word in Russian when it isn’t unavoidable. The number of such
marks is the measure of my imperfection. This one is for the word ‘capitalism,’
which I would have replaced with ‘moneygrubbing’ if I’d had my wits about
me. ‘Surveillance’ in my slovenly haste I failed to replace with ‘watchkeeping.’
So I’ve given myself two bad marks.”
“And those on the pink paper?”
“Ah, you’ve noticed that I make marks on the pink paper, too.”
“Yes, and more frequently than on the white. Is that also a measure of your
imperfection?”
“Yes,” said Sologdin curtly. “On the pink paper, I fine myself, penalize
myself, in your language, and afterward I punish myself accordingly. I work off
my punishment by chopping wood.”
“But what do you penalize yourself for?” she asked quietly.
It was bound to happen! No sooner had he reached the zenith than capricious
fate had even sent him a woman, with apologies for the delay. Give everything
or rob you of everything; that was fate’s way.
“Why do you want to know?” he asked as sternly as before.
“Tell me, what are they for?” she repeated quietly, stubbornly.
This would be his revenge on them all, on the whole MVD clan!
“Haven’t you noticed when I make those marks?”
“I have,” she said faintly.
The door key, with its aluminum tag, lay on her tracing paper.
A big warm green woolen ball stood breathing hard before Sologdin.
Awaiting his orders.
Sologdin squinted and gave the command.
“Go and lock the door! Quick!”
Larisa sprang back from the desk, and her chair fell over with a crash as she
stood up abruptly.
What had he done, impertinent slave? Was she on her way to complain?
She swept up the key, walked to the door, hips swaying, and locked it.
Sologdin made five hasty marks in a row on the pink paper.
All he had time for.