Chapter-17-Hot-Water

THATNIGHT ABAKUMOVHAD BEGUN by ordering Selivanovsky to produce
Yakonov. Then, without letting any of the others know, he had sent two
telephoned telegrams to Marfino at fifteen-minute intervals, summoning to the
ministry the zek Bobynin, then the zek Pryanchikov. The two were delivered in
separate cars and made to wait in different rooms with no opportunity to
concoct a story.
Pryanchikov was in any case hardly capable of doing so. His natural candor
was such that many a sober child of the times considered him mentally
deficient. “A phase shift” was their term for it in the sharashka.
Just now he was even less capable of collusion or prevarication than usual.
He was still dazed by brilliant visions of Moscow speeding dizzily past the
Pobeda’s windows. After the suburban gloom surrounding the camp area at
Marfino, driving out onto the brilliantly lit highway, then on toward the
cheerful bustle of the station, and on again to the neon-lit shop windows of the
Sretenka came as a shock. For Pryanchikov neither the driver nor his two
companions in plainclothes existed; it was as though he were inhaling and
exhaling flame, not air. He could not tear himself away from the window. He
had never been driven through Moscow even in the daytime, and in the whole
history of the sharashka not a single prisoner had ever seen Moscow by night.
At the Sretenka Gate the car was held up by the crowd leaving the cinema
and then by a traffic light.
Prisoners in their millions imagined that in their absence life outside had
come to a halt, that there were no men left, and that women were pining away
with no one to share, no one needing their love. But Valentin saw the well-fed,
animated metropolitan crowd surging past, caught glimpses of hats, veils,
silver-fox furs; and his tingling senses were assailed through the frosty air,
through the solid bodywork of the car, by wave after wave after wave of
perfume from the women walking by. He heard laughter, the buzz of voices,
tantalizing fragments of conversation, and he wanted to smash the plastic glass
and cry out to those women, tell them that he was young, that he was full of
longing, that he was in prison for no reason! After the monastic seclusion of the
sharashka, this was a fairy-tale world, a taste of the high life that he had never
had the luck to lead as a penniless student, then a prisoner of war, then a
prisoner.
Afterward, waiting in a room of some sort, Pryanchikov looked right through
the tables and chairs that stood there. The emotions and impressions that had
him in their grip were reluctant to let him go.
A glossy young lieutenant colonel asked Pryanchikov to follow him. With his
scraggy neck, his thin wrists, his narrow shoulders, and his skinny legs, he had
never looked like such a weakling as when his escort left him at a door and he
entered Abakumov’s office.
He did not even realize that it was an office—it was so spacious—and that it
belonged to the pair of golden shoulder boards at the end of the great room.
Nor did he notice the five-meter Stalin at his back. Nocturnal Moscow and its
women were still passing before his eyes. Valentin might have been drunk. He
just could not conceive why he was in this hall and what sort of hall it was. He
would not have been surprised if beautifully dressed women had come in and
started dancing. How ludicrous to imagine that somewhere, in a semicircular
room lit by a single blue lightbulb, though the war had ended five years ago, he
had left unfinished a glass of cold tea and men were puttering around in their
underwear.
His feet were treading on carpet, wastefully laid on the floor. The carpet had
a soft, deep pile, and you just wanted to roll on it. There was a row of big
windows in the right wall, and on the left side of the room a tall mirror
reached down to the floor.
Free men don’t appreciate things! To a zek, who cannot always get to a cheap
little mirror smaller than the palm of his hand, looking at himself in a big
mirror is a treat!
Pryanchikov halted, drawn to the mirror as if by a magnet. He went up close
to it and examined his clean, fresh face with satisfaction. He adjusted his tie a
little, then the collar of his blue shirt. Then he backed away slowly, inspecting
himself en face, at an angle, and in profile. He concluded these evolutions with
a sort of dance step. Then he went up close to the mirror again and examined
himself thoroughly. Gratified to find himself quite handsome and elegant, in
spite of his blue overalls, he moved on, not meaning to get down to business
(he had forgotten all about that) but intending to continue his survey of the
room.
Meanwhile, the man who could imprison anyone he pleased in one half of the
world, and in the other half have anyone he pleased murdered, the all-powerful
minister, in whose presence generals and marshals turned pale, was watching
this puny zek with curiosity. He had arrested and condemned them by the
million, but it was a long time since he had seen one at close quarters.
Pryanchikov minced toward the minister and looked at him inquiringly, as
though he had not expected to find him there.
“You are Engineer . . . er . . . ” Abakumov consulted his scrap of paper.
“Er, yes,” said Valentin absently. “Pryanchikov.”
“You’re a senior engineer in the group working on the, er . . . ” He glanced at
his notes again. “. . . artificial speech device?”
“What? What d’you mean, artificial speech device?” Pryanchikov waved a
hand dismissively. “Nobody at our place calls it that. They changed its name
during the campaign against kowtowing to foreign science. It’s a vocoder.
Voice coder. Or scrambler.”
“Anyway, you’re the senior engineer.”
“I suppose so. What about it?” said Pryanchikov warily.
“Sit down.”
Pryanchikov sat down with alacrity, carefully hitching up his trousers with
their knife-edge crease.
“Please speak quite frankly. You needn’t be afraid that your immediate
superiors will punish you for it. This scrambler, then, when will it be ready?
Speak frankly, now! In a month’s time? Or maybe you need two months? Speak
up and don’t be afraid.”
“Ready? The scrambler? Ha-ha!”
Pryanchikov flung himself against the soft leather chairback, threw up his
hands, and loud, youthful laughter rang out under that vaulted ceiling for the
first time. “Whatever do you mean? I can see you just don’t understand what
the scrambler is. Let me explain it to you!”
He bounced out of the springy chair and darted over to Abakumov’s desk.
“Got a bit of paper? This will do!” He tore a leaf from a blank notepad on the
minister’s desk, grabbed the minister’s meat-red pen, and began sketching a
complex of sinusoids in hasty squiggles.
Abakumov was not alarmed. The strange engineer’s speech and movements
were so childishly honest and spontaneous that he put up with this
encroachment and watched Pryanchikov curiously, without listening.
“You must realize that the human voice consists of many different
harmonics,” said Pryanchikov, sputtering in his eagerness to get it all said in a
hurry. “Well, the idea of the scrambler is to reproduce the human voice by
artificial means. . . . Blast! How do you manage to write with such a lousy
pen? . . . to reproduce it by adding together at least the main harmonics, each
transmitted by a separate set of impulses. You are familiar, of course, with
Cartesian rectangular coordinates—every schoolboy is—but what about
Fourier’s series?”
“Hold on,” Abakumov said, coming to his senses. “Just tell me one little
thing: When will it be ready? And I mean ready.”
“Ready? . . . Hmm. . . . Haven’t really thought about it.” The city by night
was losing its fascination as his mind focused on the work he loved. “The
interesting thing is this: The job gets easier if we make the timbre of the voice
coarser. In that case the number of components . . .”
“I’m asking you for a date. First of March? First of April?”
“Are you serious? April? . . . Without the cryptographers we’ll be through in,
say, four or five months, no earlier. And what’s it going to sound like when we
get around to coding and decoding the impulses? The voice quality is bound to
be even coarser. So let’s not try to guess!” he urged Abakumov, tugging at his
sleeve. “I’ll explain the whole thing to you here and now. When you
understand, you’ll agree that haste will get us nowhere!”
But Abakumov, his gaze immobilized by the meaningless squiggles of
Pryanchikov’s sketch, had already pressed the button on his desk.
The glossy lieutenant colonel reappeared and invited Pryanchikov to leave.
He obeyed with a look of open-mouthed bewilderment on his face. What
vexed him most was that he had not finished what he had to say. Then, on his
way out, he realized with a shock to whom he had been talking. He was almost
at the door before he remembered that the guys had asked him to make
complaints . . . to demand. . . . He turned around sharply and started back.
“Here! Listen! I completely forgot to tell you. . . .”
But the lieutenant colonel barred his way and hustled him toward the door;
the big boss at the desk wasn’t listening. And in that brief awkward moment all
the abuses, all the irregularities of prison life escaped the memory so long
monopolized by the technicalities of radio engineering, and all that
Pryanchikov could think of to shout as he went through the door was: “For one
thing, there’s no hot water! You get back from work late at night, and there’s no
hot water to make tea with.”
“Hot water?” queried the big boss—a general, was he? “Right. We’ll see to
it.”