Chapter-37-The-Silent-Alarm

NERZHIN FOUND APLACE BYAWINDOW, leaned back comfortably on the soft
seat, and yielded to the gentle swaying of the bus. He was sharing a double
seat with Illarion Pavlovich Gerasimovich, the optics expert, a short, narrowshouldered
man with a markedly intellectual face and pince-nez, the typical
spy portrayed in Soviet posters.
Nerzhin confided in him, keeping his voice down: “I ought to be used to it by
now. I can sit quite happily on my bare backside in the snow; I can travel
twenty-five to a truck on a freight train and watch the guards smash our
suitcases—none of that upsets me; it never makes me blow my top. But there’s
only one live nerve that connects me with the world outside, my love for my
wife; nothing can ever deaden it, and I can’t bear anyone touching it. When we
see each other once a year for half an hour, how can they forbid us to kiss?
Those swine make us pay for this one visit by spitting on our finer feelings.”
Gerasimovich’s faint eyebrows came together in a frown. They made him
look dejected even when he was only pondering his diagrams.
“There’s probably only one way to make yourself invulnerable,” he replied.
“That’s to kill all your affections and suppress all your desires.”
Gerasimovich had been at the Marfino sharashka only a few months, and
Nerzhin had not yet gotten to know him well. He liked the man, though he
couldn’t say why.
They said nothing more during the journey; traveling to see a relative is too
great an event in a prisoner’s life. It is time to awaken your forgotten soul from
its slumber in the burial vault. Memories suppressed on other days now come
to the surface. You rehearse the thoughts and feelings of a whole year, of many
years, so that you can fuse them with those short minutes of union with
someone dear to you.
The bus came to a stop outside the guardroom. The sergeant of the guard got
up on the step and poked his head inside while his eyes counted the
excursionists twice over. (The senior guard had already signed for seven head
of prisoners inside the guardroom.) Then he crawled under the bus to make
sure that no one was clinging to the springs (a disembodied devil couldn’t have
held on there for a minute) and went back inside. Only then did the inner and,
after a short delay, the outer gate swing open. The bus crossed the enchanted
boundary and with a cheerful swish of tires ran along the frosted Bishop’s
Road and past the Botanical Garden.
The zeks of Marfino could thank those who had made their establishment top
secret for these outings. Relatives who came to see them were not allowed to
know where the living dead were housed, whether they were transported from
a hundred kilometers away or picked up at the Spassky Gate, whether they
were driven in from the airport or from the next world; they were only allowed
to see well-fed, neatly dressed people with white hands who had lost their old
talkativeness and could only smile sadly and insist that they wanted for
nothing.
These meetings were rather like those ancient Greek stelae, columns with
bas-reliefs on which the deceased and their living relatives who had set up the
monument were depicted together. But there was always a little space between
this world and the world beyond the grave. The living gazed lovingly at the
dead, while the dead looked toward Hades, with eyes neither cheerful nor sad,
empty eyes, eyes that had seen too much.
As they went uphill, Nerzhin turned around to look at a view he had never
seen properly before: the building in which they lived and worked, the dark
redbrick seminary with its dull rusted hemispherical dome over their
semicircular beauty of a room. Above it rose the “sixer,” as hexagonal towers
were called in Old Russia. From the south facade, behind which were the
Acoustics Lab, Number Seven, the design office, and Anton’s room, neat rows
of unopenable windows gazed on the world with uniform blankness.
Suburban Muscovites or strollers in Ostankino Park could have no idea how
many remarkable lives, thwarted ambitions, aborted passions . . . and secrets
of state were crammed together in a red-hot, smoldering mass in that isolated
old building on the edge of town. Even inside, the building was pervaded by an
air of secrecy. One room knew nothing of the next. Neighbor knew nothing of
neighbor. The operations officers knew nothing about the women—the twentytwo
irrational, crazy, female free workers allowed into this austere building—
just as these women did not know about one another what only heaven could
know: that, with the sword hanging over them and the rules constantly dinned
into their ears, every one of the twenty-two had either formed a clandestine
attachment, found someone to love and kiss furtively, or taken pity on someone
and kept him in touch with his family.
Gleb opened his dark red cigarette case and lit up with the special enjoyment
that a cigarette can give at life’s supreme moments.
Although the thought of Nadya dominated, monopolized his mind, his body
was delighting in the unusual sensation of travel and wanted only to ride on
and on. He wished that time could stand still and the bus drive on and on along
the snow-covered road scarred with black tire tracks, past the park all white
with hoarfrost, past briefly glimpsed children calling to each other in voices
such as Nerzhin did not remember hearing since before the war—soldiers at
the front and prisoners do not hear children’s voices.
Nadya and Gleb had lived together for just a year. A year spent running
around with briefcases. They were fifth-year students, working for their final
exams.
Then, suddenly, the war was upon them.
Some people their age had funny little kids running around on short legs.
They did not.
A small child tried to run across the road. The driver swerved sharply to
miss him. The child was frightened and stood stock-still, pressing a little hand
in a blue mitten to his flushed face.
Nerzhin, who had not thought about children at all for years, suddenly saw
clearly that Stalin had robbed him and Nadya of their children. Even if he was
released after serving his sentence and they were together again, his wife
would be thirty-six or perhaps forty years old. Too late to have a child.
Leaving Ostankino Palace to the left and the brightly dressed children skating
on the lake to the right, the bus plunged into narrow side streets, shuddering
over the cobblestones.
People describing prisons have always tried to lay the horror on thick. But
perhaps prison is most horrible when there is no horror? When the horror
consists in the gray routine never varying from week to week? When you forget
that the one and only life given to you on this earth has been wrecked? When
you are willing to forgive, have already forgiven the swine for all this? When
your only thought is how to grab a crusty piece of bread, not one that is all
crumb? Or how to get underwear with no holes in it, and not too small, next
bath day?
You have to live it. You can’t possibly imagine it. You can write, “A prisoner
I in dungeon damp” or “Unbolt this dungeon dank and drear, / And bring me to
my dark-eyed dear,” without ever having been in jail; that’s easily imagined.
But it’s primitive stuff. The reality of prison life can be fully appreciated only
after years of confinement, without a break and with no end in prospect.
“When you come home,” Nadya had written. That was the horror of it. For
“you” there could be no homecoming. After fourteen years in the army and in
jail, not a single cell of your body would be as it had been before. You could
only be a newcomer. A new man, an unknown man bearing her husband’s name
would turn up, and his former wife would see that her first, her only love, for
whom she had waited fourteen years, shutting herself off from the world, no
longer existed, that he had evaporated, molecule by molecule.
All would be well if in this new, second life they came to love each other all
over again.
But what if they did not?
And anyway, would you yourself want freedom after so many years; would
you want to go outside into the frenzied whirl, so inimical to the human heart,
so hostile to the peace of the soul? Would you not pause on the threshold of
your prison and peer anxiously out: Should I or shouldn’t I go there?
Suburban streets sped past the windows. The diffused glow in the night sky,
seen from their confinement, made them think of Moscow as one great blaze of
light, a dazzling sight. But here were rows of one-story and two-story houses,
all in disrepair with peeling stucco and sagging wooden fences. Probably no
one had touched them since the war. There had been other calls on people’s
energy. There were places between Ryazan and Ruzaevka, off the map for
foreigners, where you could travel three hundred versts and see nothing but
rotted thatch.
Resting his head against the vibrating, misted window, barely hearing
himself above the noise of the engine, Gleb whispered very quietly: “Russia,
my own. Russia, my life . . . how long must we suffer?”
The bus shot out onto the broad and busy square in front of the Riga Station.
Trams, trolleys, cars, people, rushed about in the muddy light of that day of
cloud and frost. The only splash of color was that of the violet uniforms that
Nerzhin saw for the first time.
Gerasimovich between reveries had also noticed this parakeet finery and,
eyebrows raised in surprise, said for the whole bus to hear: “Look at that! The
boys in blue are back! Ol’-time cops, like before the Revolution!”
So that was what they were! Gleb remembered one of the Komsomol leaders
saying in the early thirties, “You, comrades of the Young Pioneer movement,
will never have the misfortune to see a real live tsarist policeman!”
“Well, now we have,” said Gleb with a laugh.
Gerasimovich looked blank.
Gleb bent over to whisper in his ear:
“People are so stupefied that if you stood in the middle of the street right
now shouting, ‘Down with the tyrant! Hurrah for freedom!’ they wouldn’t know
who the tyrant was and what you meant by freedom.”
Gerasimovich sent the wrinkles rippling up his forehead:
“And are you sure you know?”
“I think I do,” said Nerzhin, wryly.
“Don’t be too sure too quickly. People have a very vague idea as to what
kind of freedom a rationally ordered society needs.”
“And have we any idea what a rationally ordered society would be like? Is
such a thing possible?”
“I think it is.”
“You couldn’t give me even an approximate picture of it. Nobody has ever
succeeded in doing so.”
“But somebody will someday,” Gerasimovich insisted with modest firmness.
They looked at each other quizzically.
“I would like to hear about it,” Nerzhin said, but not as though it was urgent.
Gerasimovich nodded his small, narrow head. “I’ll tell you sometime.”
And again they sat shaking, their eyes absorbing the street, and let their minds
wander.
It defied understanding that Nadya could have waited so many years for him.
That she could have walked among this restless, feverishly questing crowd,
knowing that men’s eyes were upon her, and never feel her heart miss a beat.
Gleb told himself that if it had been the other way around, if Nadya had been
jailed and he had remained at liberty, he probably wouldn’t have held out for
as much as a year. He could never have imagined that his fragile sweetheart
was capable of such rocklike steadfastness. In his first three years in prison, he
had been sure that Nadya would change, rebound, find some distraction, get
over her loss. But it had not happened. So that Gleb had now begun to take her
waiting for granted and even to feel that waiting was no longer difficult for her.
Long ago, in the Krasnaya Presnya transit prison, when he was allowed to
send his first letter after six months under interrogation, Gleb had written with
a fragment of pencil lead on a scrap of crumpled wrapping paper, folded it into
a cocked-hat shape, and mailed it without a stamp.
“My dearest! You waited for me through four years of war. Don’t curse me,
but it was all in vain. It’s going to be another ten years. As long as I live, I
could no more forget our brief time of happiness than I could forget the sun.
But I want you to be free, from this day on. There is no need for your life also
to be ruined. You must marry someone else.”
But Nadya took this letter to mean just one thing: that “you no longer love me;
if you did you would not give me up to anybody else.”
In the army he had sent for her, and she had come all the way to the western
front to join him, traveling with a forged army pass and bluffing her way
through field checkpoints. What had been a bridgehead was by then a quiet,
grass-grown spot out of the firing line, and there they snatched a few short days
of stolen happiness. But when the opposed armies woke up again and went
over to the offensive, Nadya had to go home, wearing the same ill-fitting
soldier’s tunic and carrying the same forged pass. A heavy truck carried her off
along a forest track, waving to her husband until she was out of sight.
Disorderly lines thronged the bus stops. When a trolley bus came along,
some people stayed in line, others elbowed their way to the front. At the turn
into the Sadovaya ring road, the enticingly half-empty blue bus pulled up at a
red light, just beyond an ordinary bus stop. One crazed Muscovite raced
toward it, jumped onto the step, and banged on the door shouting, “Is this one
going to the Kotelnicheskaya Embankment? Kotelnicheskaya?”
A guard yelled at him and waved him away.
“Yes, it is,” Ivan the glassblower shouted, and burst out laughing. “Get in,
pal, and we’ll give you a lift.” Ivan was a “nonpolitical” and so was allowed a
monthly visit as a matter of course.
The other zeks all laughed with him. The Muscovite could not understand
what sort of bus it was and why he wasn’t allowed to board it. Still, he was
used to the idea that many things in this life are not allowed, and he jumped off
the step. Five other would-be passengers who had joined in the chase also
gave up.
The blue bus turned left along the ring road. Which meant that they were not
going to the Butyrki Prison, as usual. Obviously it would be the Taganka.
As he went westward with the advancing army, Nerzhin had picked up books
in ruined houses, in the wreckage of public libraries, in sheds and cellars and
attics, books that were banned, anathematized, and burned on sight in the
Soviet Union. As you read those moldering pages, a mute, irrepressible tocsin
sounded in your mind.
It was like in Hugo’s ’93. Lantenac is sitting on the dunes. He can see several
belfries at once. There is commotion; all the bells are tolling the alarm, but a
gale-force wind carries the sound away, and all he hears is . . . silence.
From his boyhood on, Nerzhin’s inner ear had heard that muffled tocsin—the
alarm bells, the groans, the calls for help, the shrieks of those who were
perishing—all of them carried away from the ears of others by a relentless
wind.
Nerzhin would have lived an untroubled life, devoted to the numerical
integration of differential equations, if he had not been born in Russia and just
when some murdered Great One’s precious body had been consigned to the
Beyond.
But the place where it had lain was still warm, and Nerzhin shouldered a
burden which no one had laid on him: From those lingering particles he would
resurrect the dead, show him to all as he really was, and dissuade them from
seeing him as he was not.
Gleb had grown up without reading a single book by Maine Read, but at the
age of twelve he had unfolded Izvestia, whose enormous pages could hide him
from head to foot, and read carefully the stenographic report of the trial of the
“engineer-saboteurs.” The boy immediately disbelieved it all. He could not
have said why. But if the reason eluded his conscious mind, he saw clearly that
it was all lies, lies, and more lies. There were engineers in families he knew,
and he could not imagine those people wrecking instead of building.
At thirteen or so, Gleb no longer went down to the street after finishing his
homework. Instead, he sat reading the newspapers. He knew all the Soviet
ambassadors in foreign countries, and all foreign ambassadors in the Soviet
Union, by name. He read all the speeches made at congresses. Then at school
they began expounding the rudiments of political economy in the fourth grade,
and from the fifth grade on there was civics practically every day, plus a little
Feuerbach. Then came Party history, in textbooks revised from year to year.
Gleb’s antipathy to the falsification of history showed itself early and
became acute while he was still a boy. He was still only in the ninth grade
when one December morning he squeezed through to a newsstand and read that
Kirov
* had been assassinated. It was at once blindingly obvious to him that
only Stalin could be Kirov’s murderer. And he shuddered to think that he was
alone in a crowd of grown men who could not understand such a simple thing.
Then the Old Bolsheviks themselves were put on trial, heaped on themselves
the foulest abuse imaginable, and confessed to having worked for every foreign
intelligence service under the sun. This was all so extravagant, so crude, so
conspicuously over the top that it cried out to be disbelieved.
But the news anchor’s histrionic voice boomed out from loudspeakers, and
Gleb’s fellow citizens huddled together on the pavement like trusting sheep.
Russian writers who dared claim descent from Pushkin and Tolstoy were
sickeningly fulsome in their paeans to the tyrant. And Russian composers,
trained in the street named after Herzen, fell over one another in the rush to lay
sycophantic choral offerings at the foot of the throne.
While Gleb, throughout his youth, heard the mute clangor of the alarm bell!
And an ineradicable resolve took root in him: to learn and to understand, to dig
up the truth and exhibit it to others!
When Gleb went out for the evening onto the boulevards of his hometown, it
was not to hanker after girls, which would have been more fitting at his age,
but to dream of someday penetrating the Biggest, the Most Important Prison in
the land—and there finding the traces of those who had died, and the key to the
riddle.
A provincial, he did not yet know that this prison was called the Great
Lubyanka.
And that if we want something badly enough, our wish will certainly be
granted.
The years went by. All Gleb Nerzhin’s expectations had been realized,
though this had not made life easy or pleasant for him. He had been seized and
carried to that very place, and he had met the survivors, people who were not a
bit surprised by his conjectures but had a hundred times more to tell him.
Everything was indeed realized, but beyond this Nerzhin had nothing—
neither scholarship, nor a life, nor even love for his wife. He felt that there
was no better wife for him in all the world, yet he could hardly claim to love
her. When one great passion fills the soul, it ruthlessly displaces all others.
The bus rattled over a bridge and wound its way through unlovely
backstreets.
Nerzhin came to. “So it isn’t the Taganka either? Where are we going then? I
don’t get it.”
Gerasimovich, interrupting a train of thought no more cheerful, answered
him. “We’re approaching Lefortovo.”
The gates opened to admit the bus. It drove into a service yard and pulled up
in front of an annex to the tall prison building. Lieutenant Colonel Klimentiev
was already at the door, a dashing figure without overcoat or cap.
It was not really very cold. Under the blanketing cloud the wintry gloom was
windless.
At a sign from the lieutenant colonel, the guards alighted and lined up outside
the bus, except for the two in the rear corner seats who stayed there with their
hands on the revolvers in their pockets. Before they had time to take a look at
the main prison block, the prisoners were trooping after the lieutenant colonel
across the yard and into the annex.
There they found themselves in a long, narrow corridor, along which seven
doors stood ajar. The lieutenant colonel walked ahead, issuing crisp orders, as
though directing a battle. “Gerasimovich, over here! Lukashenko, you’re in that
one! Nerzhin, third door!”
Klimentiev next assigned a guard to each prisoner. Nerzhin got the gangster
in disguise.
These little rooms were interrogation booths: bars at the window, which
would have let in little enough light without them, the interrogator’s armchair
and desk under the window, a little table and a stool for the prisoner under
interrogation.
Nerzhin moved the interrogator’s chair nearer to the door for his wife and
took the uncomfortable little stool, which had a crack in the seat that threatened
to pinch him. He had once spent six months under interrogation, sitting on just
such a stool at just such a wretched little table.
The door remained open. Nerzhin heard his wife’s heels tap-tapping along
the corridor, heard her dear voice: “Is this the one?”
She came into the room.
*Kirov: Sergei Kirov, an influential Bolshevik leader, was murdered in 1934.
Rumors have persisted that Stalin masterminded the assassination.