Chapter-93-Second-Wind

NEVER IN HIS LIFE had Innokenty experienced such an interminable night. He
was wide awake all night long, and a chaotic jumble of thoughts thronged his
mind, more than would occur to a man in a month of untroubled normality.
There had been time for reflection during the leisurely unpicking of the gold
facings from his diplomatic uniform, then while he was sitting half naked in the
shower room, and in the various boxes he had been moved to in the night.
“Keep permanently”: apt words for his epitaph.
In fact, whether or not they could prove that it was he who had made the
telephone call, now that they had arrested him he would never be released.
Stalin’s paw, he knew, let no one escape alive. He faced either execution or
solitary confinement for life in some bloodcurdling place like the legendary
Sukhanov monastery. It would not be a home for the aged, like Schlüsselburg.
He would not be allowed to sit down in the daytime, not be allowed to speak
for years on end, no one would ever hear of him, and he would know nothing
about the world outside, even if whole continents changed their flags or people
landed on the moon. And on the very last day, when the Stalin gang was
rounded up for Nuremberg Mark Two, Innokenty and his voiceless neighbors
on the monastery corridor would be shot to a man in solitary—as the
Communists had shot people during the retreat of 1941 and the Nazis in 1945.
But was he really afraid to die?
Last night Innokenty had been glad of every little happening, every opening of
the door to interrupt his solitude and the unfamiliar feeling of being trapped.
Now, though, all he wanted to do was to concentrate on formulating an idea
that had so far proved elusive, and he was glad that they had brought him back
to his old box and left him undisturbed for so long, though he was under
continuous surveillance through the spy hole.
Suddenly it was as if a fine veil had been lifted from his brain, and words he
had read and thought about yesterday stood out clearly.
“Belief in immortality was born of the greed of insatiable people. . . . The
wise man will find our allotted span long enough to make the round of all
attainable pleasures.”
But pleasure was not what concerned him now. He had enjoyed money, fine
clothes, esteem, women, wine, travel—but to hell with all that; right now he
longed for one thing only, justice! To live to see the end of that gang of crooks
and hear their pathetic gibbering in the dock!
Yes, he had enjoyed so many blessings! But the most precious of blessings
had never been his: the freedom to say what you think, the freedom to associate
openly with your intellectual equals. There must be so many of them, unknown
to him by name or sight, behind the brick barriers of this building! It hurt him to
think that he could not share their thoughts and feelings before he died.
It was all very well philosophizing under shady boughs in stagnantly happy
epochs!
Now that he was without pencil and notebook, whatever floated up from the
black hole of memory was all the more precious. He remembered vividly:
“You should not fear physical suffering. Prolonged suffering is always
insignificant; significant suffering is of short duration.”
But what if you sit for a day and night without sleep and without air in a box
like this, where you can’t straighten and stretch out your legs—is that
prolonged or unprolonged suffering? Significant or insignificant? Or ten years
in solitary, say, with never a living word?
In the room where photographs and fingerprints were taken, Innokenty had
noticed that it was after 1:00 a.m. It might be after 2:00 by now. A foolish
thought forced its way into his mind: His watch had been put in the storeroom;
it would go on working until it ran down, then stop; nobody would ever wind it
again; and it would await its owner’s death, or confiscation together with the
rest of his property, with its hands in that position. What time, he wondered,
would it be showing?
Was Dotty still waiting for him to take her to the operetta? Had she called the
ministry? Most probably not—they would have arrived to search the flat
immediately. An enormous flat! It would take more than five men to turn it
upside down overnight. And what was there for them to find, the idiots?
Dotty won’t go to jail. Our year apart will save her.
She’ll get a divorce and remarry.
But who knows, they may jail her. Anything is possible in this country.
My father-in-law’s career will come to a halt. A black mark! I can hear him
bellyaching now—“He has nothing to do with me, I tell you!”
All those who have ever known Counselor Volodin will loyally expunge him
from their memories.
An insensate mass would crush him, and no one on this earth would ever
know how puny, milk-and-water Innokenty had tried to save civilization!
He wanted to live! Long enough to know how it would all end.
In history one side always wins—but never only one side’s ideas! Ideas
merge; they have a life of their own. The victor always borrows something,
sometimes a lot, sometimes everything from the vanquished.
All things will merge. . . . “The enmity of race against race will be no more.”
State frontiers will disappear, and armies with them. A world parliament will
be convened. A president of the planet will be elected. He will bare his head
before mankind, and say . . .
“Bring your things.”
“Eh?”
“Bring your things.”
“What things?”
“Your gear—what d’you think?”
Innokenty rose, holding his overcoat and cap, which were especially
precious to him now because they had not been ruined in the sterilizer. Around
the door, shouldering the corridor man aside, came the smart, swarthy sergeant
major (where did they recruit these guardsmen? for what heavy duties?) with
the light blue epaulets, who consulted a piece of paper and asked:
“Name?”
“Volodin.”
“First name and patronymic.”
“Innokenty Artemievich.”
“Year of birth?”
“1919.”
“Place of birth?”
“Leningrad.”
“Bring your things. Walk!”
He went ahead, clicking as prescribed.
This time they went outside and in the dark, covered end of the yard, down a
few more steps. Were they, he wondered, taking him to be shot? Execution by
shooting, so people said, always took place in cellars and always at night.
His momentary anxiety was relieved by the thought that they would hardly
have given him those receipts if they meant to shoot him. It wouldn’t be just
yet, anyway!
(Innokenty still believed that the Ministry of State Security’s tentacles were
cleverly coordinated.)
Still clicking his tongue, the dashing sergeant major conducted him into the
building and through a dark lobby to an elevator. A woman with a pile of
freshly ironed yellowish gray linen stood to one side and watched as Innokenty
was installed in the elevator. This young washerwoman was unattractive,
socially inferior, and looked at Innokenty with the same inscrutable stony
indifference as did all the other clockwork-doll people in the Lubyanka, but
Innokenty felt just as he had in the presence of the storeroom girls who had
presented him with receipts pink, blue, and white—hurt that she should see him
so stricken, so humiliated, and perhaps think of him with insulting compassion.
This thought, too, vanished as quickly as it had come. “Keep permanently!”
After that, nothing mattered.
The sergeant major closed the door of the elevator and pressed the button.
The numbers of the floors were not marked.
The moment the elevator started moving, Innokenty recognized the humming
of the mysterious machine he had heard grinding bones beyond the wall of his
box.
He smiled wanly.
But he was glad to have been mistaken and was somehow reassured.
The elevator stopped. The sergeant major led Innokenty onto the landing and
at once into a broad corridor, where he glimpsed many guards wearing blue
epaulets with white bars. One of them locked Innokenty in an unnumbered box,
a roomy one this time, about ten square meters, dimly lit, with walls painted an
unrelieved dark green. This box, or cell, was empty, looked not very clean, had
a scuffed cement floor, and a chill in the air made it still more forbidding.
There was the usual spy hole.
Many pairs of boots could be heard shuffling past outside. Guards seemed to
be continually coming and going. The inner prison had a busy nightlife.
Innokenty had thought earlier that he would be permanently housed in narrow,
overheated, blindingly lit Box No. 8 and had suffered agonies because there
was no leg room, the light hurt his eyes, and breathing was difficult. Now he
realized his mistake, realized that he would be living in this big,
uncomfortable, unnumbered box, and he was suffering in anticipation: The
cement floor would be cold to his feet; the incessant shuffling out in the
corridor would irritate him; the poor light would be depressing. What a
difference a window would make! Even the littlest of windows! A window
like those in prison vaults on the operatic stage! But there was not even that.
The memoirs of émigrés would give you no idea of what it was like: the
corridors, the stairways, the doors, doors, doors, the comings and goings of
officers, sergeants, auxiliary staff—the Great Lubyanka was teeming with life
in the middle of the night, yet there was no longer a single prisoner in sight;
you could not possibly meet someone like yourself, could not possibly hear an
unofficial word, and even official ones were few and far between. It was as if
the whole enormous ministry were going without its night’s sleep just for your
sake, exclusively preoccupied with you and your crime.
During his first hours inside, a prisoner is at the mercy of a single murderous
idea: The newcomer must be kept apart from other prisoners so that no one can
encourage him, so that he feels in isolation the full weight of the brute force
that sustains the whole many-tentacled apparatus.
Innokenty felt more and more sorry for himself. His telephone call no longer
seemed like a great feat that would be recorded in all histories of the twentieth
century but, instead, a thoughtless and—worst of all—pointless suicidal act.
He could still hear the arrogantly casual voice of the American attaché
mispronouncing the Russian for “Who are you?” Idiot, idiot! He had probably
not even informed the ambassador. It had all been in vain. What fools they
were! Prosperity breeds idiots!
There was room to walk about in this box, but exhausted and demoralized by
all the formalities, Innokenty felt too weak. He made two attempts, then sat
down on the bench with his arms dangling.
So many noble aspirations, locked away in these boxes, entombed within
these walls, would remain unknown to posterity!
Accursed country! All the bitter pills it swallowed were medicine only for
others. Never for itself!
Other countries were luckier. Australia, for instance, tucked away at the back
of beyond, getting along nicely without air raids, without Five-Year Plans,
without discipline.
Why, oh why, had he set off in pursuit of the bomb thieves? He should have
headed for Australia and stayed there as a private person.
Today or tomorrow Innokenty should have been flying to Paris, then on to
New York!
He imagined himself not just traveling abroad but setting out within the next
twenty-four hours, and his heart sank; he would never be free again! He could
have vented his frustration with his bare fingernails on the walls of his cell!
The opening of the door forestalled this breach of prison rules. Once again
his “particulars” were checked (Innokenty answered as if in his sleep) and he
was ordered out—“with his things.” He had felt a little chilly in the box, so his
hat was on his head and his overcoat was draped over his shoulders. He tried
to leave the box like that, not realizing that he could possibly have been
carrying two loaded pistols or two daggers under his coat. He was ordered to
slip his arms through the sleeves and then put his bare hands behind his back.
More tongue clicking as he was taken to the head of the stairs near the
elevator, then downstairs. Innokenty’s main concern in his present position
might have been to memorize how many turns he took and how many steps
there were between them so that he could try to understand the layout of the
prison when he had time. But he was by now so disoriented that he walked
along absentmindedly, not noticing how far down they had gone; then,
suddenly, another hefty guard emerged from yet another corridor to confront
him, clicking just as insistently. The guard who had brought Innokenty tugged
open the door of a green plywood booth, which blocked much of a smallish
landing, bundled Innokenty in, and pulled the door closed behind himself.
Inside, there was just room to stand, and a diffused light filtered down from
above. The booth evidently had no roof; light found its way there from the
stairwell.
The normal human reaction would have been to protest loudly, but Innokenty,
who was getting used to senseless harassment and the Lubyanka’s monastic
silences, was mutely compliant, in other words, behaved just as the prison
required him to.
Of course! That probably explained all the clicking: It was to warn people
that a prisoner was being taken somewhere. One prisoner must not meet
another. Must not be heartened by the fellow feeling in his eyes!
One man was led past, then another, and Innokenty was let out of the booth
and taken farther.
Only here, as he descended the last flight, did Innokenty notice how worn
these steps were! He had never seen anything like it in his life. Between the
two sides of each step there was an elliptical hollow, and at the midpoint the
step was worn to half its original thickness.
He shuddered: In thirty years how many feet, how many times, must have
shuffled their way down to wear the stone away like that? And of every two
walkers one would be a guard, the other a prisoner.
On one landing there was a locked door with a ventilation panel, shut tight,
behind a grating. Here a new trial awaited Innokenty: He was made to stand
with his face to the wall. He could still see his escort out of the corner of his
eye, pressing a button. An electric bell rang, and the panel cautiously opened,
then closed again. A key turned noisily in the lock; the door opened; someone
came out and, unseen by Innokenty, began questioning him.
“Name?”
Innokenty naturally looked around, as people usually do when they speak to
each other, and saw a face that was neither masculine nor feminine, a flabby,
boneless face with a big red scald mark, and lower down a lieutenant’s golden
epaulets. Pausing only to yell “No turning around!” the man reeled off the
sickeningly familiar questions, and Innokenty addressed his answers to the
patch of white plaster in front of him.
Having verified that the prisoner still claimed to be the person designated on
the card and still remembered the year and place of his birth, the flabby
lieutenant rang the doorbell himself—the door had been locked behind him for
safety. The panel slid open cautiously once more, someone looked through the
aperture, the panel was closed, the key turned noisily in the lock, and the door
opened.
“Walk!” the flabby lieutenant with the red scald mark said sharply.
They stepped inside, and the door was noisily locked behind them.
Ahead, a gloomy corridor branched out in three directions. It had several
doors, and to the left, by the entrance, stood a desk, pigeonholes, and still more
guards. Innokenty caught no more than a glimpse of all this before the
lieutenant’s voice, subdued but clearly audible in this hushed place,
commanded, “Face the wall! Don’t move!”
A ludicrous situation to be in—staring closely at the border between dark
green paneling and white plaster, all the time feeling several pairs of hostile
eyes on the back of your head.
They were obviously consulting his index card. The lieutenant then ordered,
almost in a whisper but quite audibly in the profound silence: “Third box!”
A guard detached himself from the desk and, careful not to jingle his keys, set
off along the strip of carpet in the right-hand corridor.
“Hands behind! Walk!” he said very quietly.
On one side of their path, the same dark olive green wall wound around three
turns; on the other side, they passed several doors, bearing highly polished
oval number plates: 47, 48, 49, and beneath them lids over the spy holes.
Warmed by the feeling that friends were so near, Innokenty felt an urge to
disturb the lid over one of the spy holes, put his eye to it for a moment, and
take a look at the secluded life of the cell. But the guard drew him briskly on,
and, anyway, Innokenty was already inured to prison discipline—though it was
difficult to see what a man who had joined the battle over the atom bomb still
had to fear.
Fortunately for governments, mere humans (unfortunately for them) are so
constructed that as long as they live, there is always something to take away
from them. Even a man imprisoned for life, deprived of movement, of the sight
of the sky, deprived of a family and property, can be transferred to a damp
punishment cell, denied hot food, and beaten with canes; and these minor
punishments are just as keenly felt as his earlier dislodgment from the peak of
freedom and prosperity. It is to avoid these vexatious later punishments that a
prisoner duly complies with abhorrent and degrading prison regulations that
gradually destroy his humanity.
The doors around the next turn were close together, and the glazed disks bore
the numbers 1, 2, 3.
The guard unlocked the door of the third box and, with a hospitable flourish
that looked rather comical in the circumstances, held it wide open for
Innokenty. Innokenty noticed the humorous touch and looked closely at the
guard. He was a short young man with smooth black hair and slant eyes like
oblique saber cuts. He looked unfriendly, his lips and eyes alike were
unsmiling, but after all the dozens of impassive Lubyanka faces seen that night,
the mean face of this last guard was somehow rather likable.
Locked in his box, Innokenty took a look around. He had been able to
compare several boxes in the course of the night and could consider himself an
expert. This box was heavenly: three and a half steps wide, seven and a half
long, with a parquet floor. A long and fairly wide wooden bench built into the
wall almost filled the cell, and there was a small, free-standing hexagonal
wooden table near the door. The box, of course, was windowless, with just a
black grille for ventilation high up in the wall. The box was also very high,
three and a half meters of wall, every meter of it whitewashed and reflecting
the glare from a two-hundred-watt bulb in a wire cover over the door. The
light warmed the box but hurt the eyes.
Prison skills are soon learned and not easily forgotten. This time Innokenty
did not delude himself. He had no hope of staying long in this comfortable box.
He realized as soon as he saw the bench, a long, hard bench—for the
mollycoddled Innokenty was toughening up by the hour—that his first and most
important object now must be to get some sleep. And just as a young animal,
uninstructed by its mother, is taught by the promptings of its own nature all the
skills it needs to survive, so Innokenty quickly contrived to spread his overcoat
over the bench and bundle the astrakhan collar and rolled-up sleeves together
to serve as a pillow. He lay down immediately. It felt very comfortable. He
shut his eyes and got ready to sleep.
But he could not get to sleep! He had so longed to sleep when there was no
possibility of it! He had gone through all the stages of tiredness and twice lost
consciousness, dozing off for a single second—and now, when sleep suddenly
was a possibility, he could not sleep! Whenever his overstrained nerves
seemed about to relax, they suddenly became as tense as ever. Fighting off
forebodings, regrets, and speculations, Innokenty tried breathing rhythmically
and counting. It was most annoying not being able to sleep when his whole
body was warm, his ribs were on a level surface, his legs were stretched out
full length, and the guard for some reason was not keeping him awake!
He lay that way for about half an hour. His thoughts were finally becoming
incoherent, and a drowsy warmth was stealing over him from his feet upward.
But suddenly Innokenty felt that he could not possibly go to sleep with that
insanely bright light in the cell. The light not only filtered through his closed
eyelids in an orange glare; it pressed upon his eyeballs. The pressure of light,
which Innokenty had never noticed before, was now driving him to distraction.
Tossing and turning in the vain hope of finding a position where the light would
not be oppressive, Innokenty finally sat up and lowered his legs from the
bench.
He had repeatedly heard the faint sound as the cover was displaced from the
spy hole. Next time it was moved he quickly raised a finger.
The door opened noiselessly. The squint-eyed guard looked at Innokenty
without speaking.
“Please, please switch off the light,” Innokenty implored.
“Not allowed,” the squint-eyed one answered calmly.
“Change the bulb, then! Put in a dimmer one! Why such a bright bulb for such
a small . . . box?”
“Don’t speak so loudly,” Squint-eyes said very quietly. Behind him the main
corridor and the whole prison were indeed silent as the grave. “The light is as
ordered.”
And yet there was some slight sign of life in this dead face! Left with nothing
to say and expecting the door to close at any moment, Innokenty asked for a
drink of water.
Squint-eyes nodded and locked the door noiselessly. Innokenty did not hear
him walking away or returning along the strip of carpet outside the box. There
was just a little jingle as the key was inserted, and Squint-eyes stood in the
doorway with a mug of water. Like those on the ground floor of the prison, the
mug was decorated with a picture of a cat, but this one was without spectacles,
book, or bird.
Innokenty drank heartily and, in between swallows, took a look at the guard
still standing there. Keeping one foot outside, he half closed the door, leaving
just room for his shoulders, and, with a distinctly nonregulation wink, asked in
a low voice:
“Who were you?”
How strange it sounded! Being addressed like a human being, for the first
time that night! The natural tone of voice in which the question was asked
(quietly, so that the man’s superiors could not overhear it) and the
unintentionally cruel word “were” seemed to involve Innokenty in a sort of
conspiracy with the guard.
“Diplomat,” he whispered. “State counselor.”
Squint-eyes nodded sympathetically and said: “Well, I was a sailor once—
Baltic Fleet!” Then, after some hesitation: “What are you in for?”
“I don’t know myself,” Innokenty said cautiously. “For no particular reason.”
Squint-eyes nodded sympathetically.
“That’s what they all say to start with,” he said, and added coarsely, “Want to
go for a . . . you-know-what?”
“Not just yet,” Innokenty said. The unenlightened newcomer did not know
that the offer made to him was the greatest favor in the power of a guard to
give and one of the greatest blessings on earth, normally accessible to
prisoners only at prescribed times.
After this absorbing conversation, the door closed, and Innokenty stretched
out on the bench again, trying in vain to escape the pressure of the light through
his unprotected eyes. He tried covering his eyes with one hand, but the hand
became numb. It occurred to him that it would help a lot if he twisted his
handkerchief into a sort of blindfold—but where was it? It had remained on the
floor where it had fallen. What a stupid young pup he had been last night!
Such small items as a handkerchief, an empty matchbox, a bit of coarse
thread, a plastic button are the prisoner’s best friends! He never knows when
one or another of them may become indispensable and save the day!
Suddenly the door opened, and Squint-eyes transferred a red-striped quilted
mattress from his own embrace to Innokenty’s. A miracle! The Lubyanka not
only not preventing a prisoner from sleeping but doing its best to help him!
Tucked inside the doubled-up mattress were a little feather pillow, a
pillowcase, and a sheet—the last two stamped “Inner Prison”—and even a
gray blanket.
What bliss! Now he’d be able to sleep! His first impressions of prison had
been too gloomy! Enjoying his comfort in anticipation (and doing it with his
own hands for the first time in his life), he pulled the pillowcase over the
pillow, spread the sheet over the bench (which was so narrow that the mattress
drooped over the edge), undressed, lay down, covered his eyes with the sleeve
of his jacket and—nothing could stop him now—was just beginning to sink into
a sweet sleep—“in the arms of Morpheus,” as they say, when . . .
. . . suddenly, the door crashed open and Squint-eyes said, “Take your hands
from under the blanket!”
“What for?” Innokenty exclaimed, almost weeping. “Why did you wake me
up? I had such difficulty getting to sleep!”
“Get your hands out!” the guard repeated, unmoved. “Hands must be out in
the open.”
Innokenty obeyed. But it proved to be not so easy to fall asleep with his
hands above the blanket. This was diabolically clever! Human beings, without
even noticing it, have an inveterate habit of concealing their hands, pressing
them to their bodies, while they sleep.
Innokenty tossed and turned, trying to adapt himself to yet another cruel
humiliation. At last sleep began to get the upper hand. A sweetly toxic mist
was flooding his consciousness.
Suddenly a noise in the corridor reached his ears. Beginning at a distance
and gradually drawing nearer, they were banging neighboring doors. Some
word or other accompanied every bang. Now they were next door. And now
Innokenty’s own door opened.
“Time to get up!” the man who had served with the Baltic Fleet announced
uncompromisingly.
“What? Why?” Innokenty bellowed. “I haven’t slept all night!”
“Six o’clock. Getting-up time. It’s the law!” the sailor repeated and walked
on to deliver his message to others.
And this was when Innokenty felt a more powerful need than ever to sleep.
He collapsed on his bed and immediately lost consciousness.
But right away—he couldn’t have managed more than a couple of minutes’
sleep—Squint-eyes flung the door open with a crash and repeated: “Time to
get up! Time to get up! Roll your mattress up!”
Innokenty raised himself on one elbow and looked blearily at his tormentor,
who just an hour ago had seemed so amiable.
“But I haven’t slept, I tell you!”
“That’s not my business.”
“Right, I roll my mattress up, I get up—and what do I do next?”
“Nothing. Sit.”
“But why?”
“Because it’s six a.m., you’ve been told.”
“So I’ll sleep sitting up!”
“I’ll see you don’t. I’ll wake you up.”
Innokenty held his head in his hands and rocked from side to side. What
looked like a glimmer of compassion showed in the squint-eyed guard’s face.
“Do you want a wash?”
“Oh, all right,” Innokenty said absently, reaching for his clothes.
“Hands behind! Walk!”
The washroom was around a bend. Despairing of getting any sleep that night,
Innokenty risked removing his shirt and washing in cold water down to his
waist. He splashed water freely on the wide cement floor of the chilly
washroom. The door was shut, and Squint-eyes did not disturb him.
Perhaps he is human, Innokenty thought, but if so, why did he so perfidiously
fail to warn me that reveille would be at six?
The cold water rinsed the debilitating poison of a broken sleep out of
Innokenty’s system. In the corridor he started saying something about breakfast,
but the guard cut him short. Back in the box he gave his answer.
“There won’t be any breakfast.”
“No breakfast? So what will there be?”
“At eight o’clock you get your ration, sugar, and tea.”
“What do you mean, ration?”
“Bread, of course.”
“So when is breakfast?”
“Nothing about that in regulations. Right through to dinner.”
“And I’ve got to be sitting here all that time?”
“That’s enough talk!”
Innokenty quickly raised his hand when the door was very nearly closed.
“Now what?” the veteran of the Baltic Fleet said, opening the door wide.
“My lining’s been ripped open and my buttons cut off. Can I get somebody to
sew them back on?”
“How many buttons?”
They counted.
The door was locked and unlocked again shortly afterward. Squint-eyes held
out a needle, a dozen or so lengths of thread, and a few buttons of different
sizes and materials—bone, plastic, wood.
“What good are these? D’you think the ones they cut off were like these?”
“Take them! They’re about all we’ve got!” Squint-eyes said, raising his
voice.
And Innokenty began sewing, for the first time in his life. It took him a little
while to find out how to knot the thread at one end, how to draw the stitches
through, and how to make sure the button was firmly attached. Not having a
millennium of human experience to draw on, Innokenty discovered for himself
how to sew. He pricked himself repeatedly, and his tender fingertips began to
hurt. It took him a long time to sew up the lining of his uniform and stuff the
padding back into his gutted overcoat. He had sewn on some of the buttons in
the wrong places, so that his uniform was puckered at the edges.
But this unhurried, painstaking labor not only killed time, it calmed Innokenty
down completely. He no longer felt afraid or despondent. Clearly, even this
nest of legendary horrors—the Great Lubyanka Prison—was not so terrible.
People could live even here (how he wished that he could meet them!). This
man, who had not slept all night and had not eaten, this man whose life had
been shattered in a few hours, had risen above it all; he was like an athlete
whose stiffening body becomes fresh and tireless again with his second wind.
A guard, a different one this time, took away the needle.
Then they brought a five-hundred-gram lump of half-baked black bread, with
a triangular makeweight and two lumps of sugar.
A little later they poured some hot, colored liquid into the mug with the cat
and promised a refill.
All of which meant that it was 8:00 a.m. on December 27.
Innokenty dropped the whole day’s sugar ration into the mug and
unfastidiously tried to stir it with his finger, but the tea was too hot. He stirred
it by revolving the mug, drank with relish (he felt no need for food at all), and
raised his hand to ask for more. Shivering with pleasure, Innokenty imbibed the
second mugful, too. There was no sugar this time, but he enjoyed all the more
keenly the acrid aroma of stale tea.
Suddenly he was thinking more clearly than he had for a long time past.
In the narrow passage between the bench and the opposite wall, gripping the
rolled-up mattress, he began pacing as if warming up for a fight. Three short
steps forward, three short steps back.
He would have done no other. He could not have remained indifferent.
It had fallen to him to do it.
What was it Uncle Avenir had said? How did Herzen put it: “Where are the
limits of patriotism? Why does a man love his motherland?”
Nothing was more important to him now, nothing more cheering, than his
memories of old Avenir. He had met so many men and women frequently, year
after year, made friends of them, shared their pleasures; but it was the old man
at Tver, with the funny little house, whom he had seen only for two days, who
meant most to him here in the Lubyanka. No one in his life had ever been so
important to him.
Slowly pacing his cul-de-sac, seven steps there, seven steps back, Innokenty
tried to remember what the old man had said. It was at the back of his mind.
But for some reason what came uppermost was “Our inner feelings of
satisfaction and dissatisfaction are the highest criteria of good and evil.”
That wasn’t his uncle. That was something stupid. Of course—Epicurus. He
hadn’t understood it yesterday. Now it was clear: Whatever gives me pleasure
is good; whatever displeases me is bad. Stalin, for instance, enjoyed killing
people—so that, for him, was “good”? Whereas we who are imprisoned for
the truth get no satisfaction from it—so is that evil?
How wise it all seems when you read these philosophers as a free man! But,
for Innokenty, good and evil were now distinct entities, visibly separated by
that light gray door, those olive green walls, and that first night in prison.
His struggle and his suffering had raised him to a height from which the great
materialist’s wisdom seemed like the prattle of a child or perhaps a savage’s
rule of thumb.
The door opened noisily.
“Name?” barked a new guard, of Asiatic appearance.
“Volodin.”
“Interrogation! Hands behind!”
Innokenty put his hands behind him, and with his head thrown back, like a
bird swallowing water, walked out of the box.
“Why must love of country extend to. . . .”