Chapter-18-“Oh,-Wonder-Working-Steed”

IN CAME BOBYNIN. He wore blue overalls, like Pryanchikov, but was a hefty
fellow with a prison-camp haircut.
Showing as little interest in his surroundings as if he visited this office a
hundred times a day, he walked straight ahead, sat down, without speaking, in
one of the comfortable armchairs near the minister’s desk, and lengthily blew
his nose into a not-very-white handkerchief, laundered by himself last bath day.
Abakumov, who had been somewhat disconcerted by Pryanchikov, though he
had not taken that lightheaded young man too seriously, was glad to find that
Bobynin looked more sensible. So instead of yelling “On your feet!” he
assumed that Bobynin was no expert on shoulder boards and had not realized
as he passed through a succession of antechambers just where he was going.
“Why,” Abakumov asked almost mildly, “do you sit down without
permission?”
Bobynin, with the merest sideways glance at the minister, went on cleaning
his nose with the help of the handkerchief and answered simply: “Well, there’s
a Chinese saying that standing is better than walking, sitting is better than
standing, and lying down is better still.”
“Have you any idea who I might be?”
Resting his elbows comfortably on the arms of the chair he had chosen,
Bobynin hazarded a lazy guess.
“Who you might be? Marshal Göring, or somebody like that?”
“Like who?”
“Marshal Göring. He once visited an aircraft factory near Halle, where I
happened to be working in the designers’ office. The generals there were all
walking on tiptoe, but I turned my back on him. He took a good look and went
off into the next room.”
Something remotely resembling a smile passed over Abakumov’s face, but it
quickly became a frown as he studied this outrageously insolent prisoner.
“What do you mean? Don’t you see any difference between us?”
“Us meaning you and him? Or you and me?” Bobynin’s voice was like stage
thunder. “I see the difference between us very clearly: You need me, and I
don’t need you!”
Abakumov could produce a peal of thunder and scare people himself. But on
this occasion he felt that shouting would be useless and would only make him
look silly. This prisoner was obviously a problem.
He contented himself with a warning.
“Listen, prisoner, just because I’m being easy on you, you mustn’t forget
yourself.”
“If you were rough, I wouldn’t talk to you at all, Citizen Minister. Shout at
your colonels and your generals. They’ve got a lot to lose.”
“We can make you toe the line if we have to.”
“That’s where you’re wrong, Citizen Minister!” Bobynin’s bold eyes flashed
with undisguised hatred. “I’ve got nothing, understand, nothing at all! You can’t
get at my wife and child; a bomb got to them first. My parents are dead. All I
own in this world is a handkerchief. These overalls and the buttonless shirt
underneath them (he bared his chest to show it) belong to the state. You took
my freedom from me long ago, and you can’t give it back because you have no
freedom yourself. I’m forty-two years old, and you’ve slapped a twenty-fiveyear
sentence on me, I’ve been in hard-labor camps, walked about with
number patches on my clothes, and wearing handcuffs, and with dogs around
me, and I’ve been in a penal work brigade; so what else can you threaten me
with? What else can you take away from me? My engineer’s job, perhaps?
That would be your loss, not mine. I’ll have a cigarette.”
Abakumov opened a pack of Troika cigarettes, special Kremlin issue, and
pushed it over to Bobynin.
“Here, take some of these.”
“No, thanks, I won’t change my brand. Might make me cough.” He took a
Belomor from his homemade case. “In fact, you should get it into your head,
and pass it on to whoever needs to know up above, that your power depends
on not taking absolutely everything away from people. The man from whom
you’ve taken everything is no longer in your power; he is free again.”
Bobynin stopped talking and concentrated on his smoking. He was enjoying
teasing the minister and reclining in such a comfortable chair. His only regret
was that he had refused the deluxe cigarettes, just to show off.
The minister consulted his scrap of paper.
“Engineer Bobynin! You are a senior engineer working on the speech
clipping apparatus?”
“I am.”
“Please tell me precisely when it will be ready for use.”
Bobynin’s bushy eyebrows shot up.
“What’s all this? Couldn’t you find somebody senior to answer that
question?”
“I want to hear it from you. Will it be ready by February?”
“February? Are you joking? If we cut all the corners, hurry now and worry
later, it could be ready, say, half a year from now. But with perfect coding? I
have no idea. A year maybe.”
Abakumov was stunned. He remembered the menacing twitching of the
Boss’s mustache and shuddered to think of the promises he had made, echoing
Selivanovsky. He had the sinking feeling of a man who goes to the clinic with a
cold and finds he has cancer of the nasopharynx.
The minister supported his head on both hands and said feebly:
“Now, Bobynin. Weigh your words. I beg you. What can we do to hurry it
up?”
“Hurry it up? Can’t be done.”
“But why? What’s the reason? Whose fault is it? Don’t be afraid, tell me!
Give me the names of those responsible, whatever sort of shoulder boards they
wear! I’ll soon have them off!”
Bobynin threw back his head and gazed at the Rossia Insurance Company’s
nymphs gamboling on the ceiling.
“That makes two and a half to three years, and the time limit you were given
was one year.”
At this Bobynin blew up.
“What do you mean, time limit? Do you think scientists are wizards with
magic wands? ‘Build me a palace by tomorrow’—and tomorrow a palace
there will be. What if the problem is posed incorrectly? What if new
phenomena come to light? Time limit! Don’t you know that something more
than an order is needed? You need free men with full bellies and minds at ease.
And not this atmosphere of suspicion. Look, we shifted a little lathe from one
place to another, and either while we were doing it or after, it got cracked.
God knows how it happened. Repairing it was an hour’s work for a welder.
It’s only fit for the scrap heap anyway. A hundred and fifty years old, no motor,
an overhead belt drive. Well, because of that, Major Shikin, the security
officer, has been badgering us all for two whole weeks, interrogating
everybody, looking for somebody to pin a second sentence on for sabotage.
That’s one parasite, the security officer at the workplace; then there’s the other
parasite, the security officer in the prison block, making nervous wrecks of us
with his conduct reports and dirty tricks. What the hell do you expect all these
security operations to produce? Everybody says we’re making a secret
telephone for Stalin. Stalin personally is putting the pressure on, and even for
an assignment like this you can’t ensure regular supplies of equipment; either
we haven’t got the condensers we need, or the radio valves are the wrong kind,
or there aren’t enough electronic oscillographs. We’re paupers! It’s a disgrace.
‘Who’s to blame?’ you ask. Do you ever spare the men a thought? We all work
twelve hours a day for you, some of us sixteen, and you give meat only to the
senior engineers and bare bones to the rest. Why don’t you let the ’58-ers
*
see
their families? It’s supposed to be once a month, and you allow it once a year.
Do you think that helps to keep morale up? Maybe there aren’t enough meatwagons
to transport prisoners? Or enough money to pay the guards overtime?
Regulations! You’ve got regulations on the brain. You’ll drive yourselves mad
with regulations. At one time Sunday was our day off. Now it’s forbidden.
Why? To make us work harder? Are you trying to skim cream from shit? It’s
not going to speed things up if we suffocate for lack of a breath of air. Now
here we are again. Why did you send for me in the middle of the night? Isn’t the
day long enough? I have work to do tomorrow. I need sleep.”
Bobynin sat up straight, looking big and angry.
Abakumov was breathing heavily, huddled over the desk. It was 1:25 a.m. In
an hour’s time he had to present himself at the Kuntsevo dacha and report to
Stalin.
If this engineer was right, how could he wriggle out of it?
Stalin never forgave.
As he dismissed Bobynin, he remembered the trio of liars from the Special
Technology Department, and hot rage blinded him.
He took up the receiver and sent for them.
* ’58-ers: Citizens who were arrested under Article 58 of the Russian
(RSFSR) Penal Code, which targeted counter-revolutionary activities; its most
notorious section was number 10, with its catchall terms “anti-Soviet and
counter-revolutionary propaganda and agitation.”