Chapter-31-How-to-Darn-Socks

THE ORDERLYOFFICERS made the rounds of the special prison at 8:55. This
operation took hours in the camps, with the prisoners standing out in the cold,
harried from place to place, counted and recounted—singly, in fives, in
hundreds, by brigade—but here in the sharashka it went quickly and painlessly:
The prisoners would be drinking tea at their lockers; two orderly officers, the
one going off duty and his relief, would come in; prisoners would stand up
(some of them!) while the relieving officer scrupulously counted heads, made
announcements, and gave complaints a perfunctory hearing.
The officer coming on duty, Senior Lieutenant Shusterman, was tall, dark
haired; and though not exactly grim, he took care, as all guards of the Lubyanka
School are supposed to, not to show any human feeling at all. He had been
sent, together with Nadelashin, from the Lubyanka to Marfino in order to stiffen
prison discipline. Some of the prisoners in the sharashka remembered them
both from the Lubyanka; as senior sergeants they had both served at one time as
escorting officers. They would take charge of the newly arrived prisoner, who
would be standing, facing the wall, and march him up the famous “worn steps”
to the mezzanine between the fourth and fifth floors, where an opening had
been knocked in the wall between the prison and the interrogation block. For a
third of a century all those held in the central prison had been taken that way:
monarchists, anarchists, Octobrists, Kadets, S-Rs, Mensheviks, Bolsheviks,
Savinkov, Kutepov, the Exarch Pyotr, Shulgin, Bukharin, Rykov, Tukhachevsky,
Professor Pletnyov, Academician Vavilov, Field Marshal Paulus, General
Krasnov, scientists of world fame, and newly hatched poets—first the
criminals themselves, then their wives and daughters. They were marched up
to a uniformed woman with a Red Star on her chest, and every prisoner, as he
passed, signed his name in her Book of Fates, writing in the one-line gap cut in
a tin sheet so that he would not see the names before and after his own. They
were then taken up some stairs where nets had been rigged in the stairwell like
safety nets at the circus, in case a prisoner jumped. They were led through the
long, long corridors of the ministry on Lubyanka Square, made stuffy by
electricity and chilled by the gold of colonels’shoulder boards.
Though the prisoners under interrogation were in the depths of their initial
despair, they quickly started noticing the difference: Shusterman (they didn’t
know his name then, of course) eyed the prisoner morosely from under his
bushy brows, sank his fingers like talons into the man’s arms, and brutally
dragged the panting wretch upstairs. Moonfaced Nadelashin, who looked a
little eunuchlike, always walked at a slight distance from the prisoner, never
touched him, and told him politely which way to turn.
Shusterman, however, although the younger, now had three stars on his
shoulder boards.
Nadelashin announced that those who were going to see visitors should
report to the headquarters building at 10:00 a.m. Asked if there would be a
film that day, he replied that there would not. A slight murmur of discontent
was heard, but Khorobrov’s comment from his corner was:
“No film at all is better than crap like Cossacks of the Kuban.”
Shusterman turned around sharply to try to catch the speaker and as a result
lost count and had to start again.
In the silence that followed, somebody invisible but quite audible said:
“Now you’ve done it; they’ll put that on your file.”
Khorobrov’s upper lip twitched as he answered, “Let them, damn and blast
them. They’ve got so much on me there’s no room left in my file.”
Dvoetyosov, still unkempt and in his underwear, dangled his long hairy legs
over the side of his top bunk and called out in an uncouth yell:
“Junior Lieutenant! What about the party? Will there be a party or not?”
“There will,” Junior answered, obviously pleased to be giving good news.
“We’ll put the tree up here in the semicircular room.”
“Can we make some toys, then?” Ruska shouted cheerfully from another top
bunk. He was perched up there cross-legged, tying his tie with the aid of a
mirror propped up against his pillow. He would be meeting Klara in five
minutes. He had seen her already through the window, crossing the yard from
the guardroom.
“We will have to ask about that. I haven’t had any instructions.”
“What do you need instructions for?”
“What’s a New Year’s tree without toys?”
“Friends! Let’s make toys!”
“Steady there, boy! What about hot water?”
“Will the minister supply it?”
The room buzzed merrily, discussing the party. The orderly officers had
already turned to leave, but Khorobrov’s harsh Vyatka accent rose above the
hubbub and called after them: “And you can tell them to leave us the tree until
the Orthodox Christmas! It’s a Christmas tree, not a New Year’s tree!”
The officers pretended not to hear and left.
Everybody was talking at once. Before he had finished with the officers,
Khorobrov was busily explaining himself in dumb show to someone invisible.
He never used to observe Christmas or Easter but had started doing so in
prison in a spirit of contradiction. At least those days were not marked by
stricter searches and stricter discipline than usual. For the anniversaries of the
Revolution and May Day, he usually found himself some washing or sewing to
do.
Abramson, his neighbor, finished his tea, wiped his lips, polished a misted
pair of glasses, square lenses in a plastic frame, and said:
“Ilya Terentich! You’re forgetting the second commandment for prisoners:
Thou shalt not stick thy neck out!”
Khorobrov woke up from his debate with the unseen partner and spun around
as though he had been stung.
“That’s the Old Testament; it belongs to your rotten generation. You were
meek and mild, so they polished the lot of you off.”
The taunt could not have been more unfair. It was men imprisoned at the
same time as Abramson who had organized a strike, and a hunger strike, at
Vorkuta. But it had made no difference in the end. The precept caught on
because it made sense.
Abramson merely shrugged. “If you act up, they’ll pack you off to a hardlabor
camp.”
“That’s what I want, Grigory Borisych! I don’t mind going to a blasted hard
labor camp; at least I’ll have good company. Maybe you can speak freely there,
without stoolies all around you.”
Rubin, with his beard disheveled and his tea unfinished, was standing by the
bunk bed that held Potapov and Nerzhin and making a friendly speech to its
upper story:
“Congratulations, my young Montaigne, my infant Pyrrhonist.”
“I’m very touched, my dear Lev, but why. . . ?”
Nerzhin was kneeling on his top bunk holding a writing case. It was a
prisoner’s spare-time handiwork, which meant that it was the most carefully
executed work in the world, since prisoners have nowhere to hurry to. Neatly
tucked inside a deep-red calico cover were pockets, fastenings, press studs,
and packets of excellent paper looted from Germany. All this, of course, had
been made on the state’s time and with the state’s materials.
“Anyway, we aren’t allowed to write anything much in this sharashka except
denunciations.”
“My birthday wish for you”—Rubin’s large, thick lips shaped themselves
into a comic trumpet—“is that the light of truth may illuminate your skeptical
and eclectic brain.”
“You and your truth! Who knows what truth is?” Gleb sighed. His face,
which had looked youthful while he was busy preparing for his wife’s visit,
had become haggard and ashen. And his hair was all over the place again.
On the neighboring top bunk, above Pryanchikov, a plump, bald-headed,
middle-aged engineer was using the last few seconds of free time to read the
newspaper borrowed from Potapov. He held it wide open, at some distance
from his eyes, occasionally frowning and moving his lips as he read. When the
electric bell shrilled in the hallway, he looked annoyed and folded the
newspaper untidily.
“What’s all this damned nonsense about world domination? They keep
blathering on about it all the time.”
He looked round for a suitable place to f ling the newspaper.
At the far end of the room, the enormous Dvoetyosov had struggled into his
overalls and was standing with his enormous behind sticking out, smoothing
and straightening his bed into shape on the top bunk.
“Who keeps on about it, Zemelya?” he called out in his bass voice.
“They all do.”
“What about you? Are you out to dominate the world?”
“What, me?”
Zemelya sounded surprised, as though he took the question seriously. “No-oo.”
He smiled broadly. “Why the hell would I want to? I have no such
ambition.” He climbed down, grunting.
“In that case, let’s go and work ourselves sick!” Dvoetyosov said, launching
his bulk from the bed and landing with a resounding thud. He was going to his
Sunday work uncombed, unwashed, and unbuttoned.
The bell rang lengthily. It was ringing to announce that inspection was over
and that the “royal gates” were open. Prisoners were already thronging through
them onto the stairway of the institute.
Doronin was first out. Sologdin, who kept the window closed while he was
getting up and having his tea, now wedged it open with the Ehrenburg volume
and hurried into the hallway to catch Professor Chelnov as he emerged from
the “professor’s cell.” Rubin, as usual, had managed to get nothing done in the
early morning. He hurriedly put what he had not eaten and drunk into his
locker, upsetting something inside it, and flapped around his lumpy, rumpled,
impossible bed vainly trying to straighten it enough not to be brought back to
make it again.
Nerzhin, meanwhile, was trying on his “fancy dress.” At one time, long, long
ago, prisoners in a sharashka wore smart suits and overcoats every day and
went to meet their visitors in the same clothes. Now they had been made to
wear blue overalls, so that the tower sentries could distinguish them from free
workers. But the prison authorities made them change when they had visitors,
handing out used shirts and suits confiscated, perhaps, from private wardrobes
when an inventory was made upon arrest. Some prisoners liked seeing
themselves well dressed, if only for a few brief hours; others would gladly
have avoided this dressing up in dead men’s clothes, but the authorities flatly
refused to take them in overalls: Relatives must not get a bad impression of
prison life. And no one was stiff-necked enough to forfeit a relative’s visit. So
dress up they did.
The semicircular room had emptied. Left behind were twelve pairs of beds
welded into twelve double-decker bunks and made up hospital fashion, with
the sheets turned back over the blankets to catch the dust and get dirty first.
This system could only have been thought up by a bureaucratic and, surely,
masculine brain; even the inventor’s wife would not use it in her own home.
However, this was what the Prison Health inspectorate demanded.
A pleasant silence, rare in this place, had settled on the room, and no one felt
like breaking it.
There were four of them left behind. Nerzhin, costuming himself, Khorobrov,
Abramson, and a balding designer.
The designer was one of those timid zeks who spend years inside without
beginning to acquire the cool cheek a prisoner needs. He would never have
dared to stay away from work even on Sunday, but, feeling poorly, he had
armed himself in advance with permission from the prison doctor to take what
in any case should be his day off. Now he had laid out on his bed a number of
socks with holes, some darning wool, and a cardboard mushroom of his own
making, and was wondering, with knitted brows, where to begin.
Grigory Borisovich Abramson, who had duly completed one ten-year
sentence (not counting six years of banishment beforehand) and was now
serving a second, couldn’t always avoid turning out on Sundays, but he did his
best. At one time, in his Komsomol days, wild horses couldn’t have kept him
away from voluntary work on Sundays. But Sunday shifts were thought of then
as a headlong rush to get the economy right; in a year or two, everything would
be going splendidly, and thereafter all gardens would bloom as one. But as the
decades went by, voluntary work on Sundays ceased to be exciting and became
mere drudgery. The trees that were planted refused to blossom and indeed
were mostly pushed over and mangled by tractors. Long years of imprisonment
and reflection had changed Abramson’s mind; he had come to believe that man
was by nature averse to work and would not do it unless poverty or a big stick
compelled him to. So despite the fact that—all things considered, and keeping
in mind the still-valid and only possible goal of mankind (Communism)—all
these endeavors, including even Sunday shifts, were undoubtedly necessary,
Abramson no longer felt strong enough to take part in them. He was one of the
few men in the place who had served, and more than served, ten full, ten
terrible years, and he knew that it was not a myth, not wild twaddle on the part
of the court, not a bad joke till the first general amnesty (as new boys always
believed); ten years meant ten, if not twelve or fifteen, exhausting years out of
a man’s life. He had learned long ago to economize on muscular movement, to
cherish every minute of relaxation. And he knew that the best way to spend
Sunday was to lie still in bed, stripped to your underwear.
So now he pulled out the book with which Sologdin had wedged the window
open, shut the window, unhurriedly removed his overalls, lay down under the
blanket, wrapped it around himself, cleaned his glasses with a scrap of
chamois leather kept for the purpose, put a piece of hard candy in his mouth,
straightened his pillow, and got out from under his mattress a rather fat book,
wrapped in paper as a precaution. Just to look at him would make you feel
comfortable.
Khorobrov, on the other hand, was in torment. He was lying fully dressed on
top of his made bed, his feet, in shoes, resting on the bedrail, miserable in his
idleness. He felt keenly, and took a long time to get over, things that others
treated lightly. In accordance with the well-known voluntary principle, all
prisoners were listed every Saturday, without necessarily being asked, as
volunteers for Sunday work, and the prison was duly notified. If registration
had indeed been voluntary, Khorobrov would have put his name down every
time and gladly spent his days off at his workbench. But because registration
was a blatant farce, he felt bound to stay in bed and vegetate in the locked
prison.
Prisoners in camps can only dream of a Sunday spent lying down in a warm,
closed room. But in a sharashka the prisoner’s ache is not in his back.
There was absolutely nothing to do! Such newspapers as there were he had
read the day before. Books from the special prison’s library lay in a heap,
open or shut, on the stool by his bed. One was a collection of articles by
eminent writers. Khorobrov, after some hesitation, opened it at an article by
the Tolstoy who, if he had had any conscience, would not have dared to publish
under that name. The article, written in June 1941, said that “German soldiers,
driven by terror and madness, have run up against a wall of iron and fire at the
frontier.” Khorobrov slammed the book shut with a whispered obscenity and
put it aside. Whenever he looked into a book, he chanced on some sore point
because his world was made up of nothing but sore points. These rulers of
men’s minds in their lavishly appointed out-of-town houses heard nothing
except the radio and saw nothing but their flowerbeds. A semiliterate peasant
knew more about life than they did.
The other books in the heap were “artistic literature,” but reading them
sickened Khorobrov just as much. One was a bestseller called Far from
Moscow, which everybody outside was avidly reading. Khorobrov had read a
bit of it the day before and tried again now, but it made him feel queasy. It was
a pie without filling, a hollow egg, a stuffed bird. It was about the use of
convict labor on building sites. But the camps were not given their proper
names; the builders were not called zeks; nothing was said about short rations
or punishment cells. The zeks became Komsomols, well dressed, well shod,
and bursting with enthusiasm. An experienced reader sensed immediately that
the author knew, had seen, had touched the truth, that he might well have been
an operations officer in a camp himself, but that he was a barefaced liar.
His one and only oath turned up on schedule, with its three words differently
arranged, and Khorobrov tossed the bestseller aside.
Another of the books was the Selected Works of the famous Galakhov.
Vaguely remembering him and expecting something better, Khorobrov had
started reading this volume but had given up, feeling that it was the same sort
of insult as the list of Sunday “volunteers.” Galakhov had written passable
love stories but had long ago slipped into the approved manner, writing as
though his readers were not normal people but imbeciles who could be kept
happy with meretricious trash. Anything deeply troubling was missing from
these books. Except for the war, their authors would have been left with
nothing to write except hymns of praise. The war had given them access to
feelings that all could understand. But even so they concocted unreal personal
problems, like that of the Komsomol who derails munitions trains by the dozen
behind enemy lines but agonizes day and night because he is not paying his
dues and so may not be a genuine Komsomol.
Khorobrov rang the changes on his favorite oath again and felt a little better.
Another of the books on the locker was American Short Stories by
progressive writers. Khorobrov could not check these stories against real life,
but the selection surprised him; every story inevitably contained something
very nasty about America. This poisonous collection, taken together, gave such
a nightmarish picture of their country that you could only wonder why the
Americans hadn’t all fled or hanged themselves long ago.
No, there was nothing to read!
Khorobrov decided to have a smoke. He took out a cigarette and rolled it
between his fingers. In the dead silence he could hear the tight-packed paper.
He wanted to smoke without leaving the room, right there, with his feet up on
the bedrail. Prisoners who smoke know that the cigarette you really enjoy is
the one you smoke lying down, on your own strip of bedboard or your own
bunk—a leisurely smoke, with your eyes fixed on the ceiling and the pictures
from the irrecoverable past and the unattainable future that float across it.
But the bald-headed designer was a nonsmoker and didn’t like smoke, and
Abramson, though a smoker, subscribed to the fallacious theory that the air in
the room should be fresh. While in prison Khorobrov had come to believe
firmly that respect for the rights of others is the beginning of freedom, so he
lowered his feet to the ground with a sigh and made for the door. On the way
he saw the thick book in Abramson’s hands, decided that it was not from the
prison library and must have come from outside—and nobody would ask for
rubbish to be brought in.
He was not foolish enough to ask Abramson out loud, “What are you
reading?” or “Where did you get that from?” (The designer, or Nerzhin, might
overhear the answer.) He went very close to Abramson and spoke quietly.
“Grigory Borisych, can I take a peek at the title page?”
“Go ahead,” said Abramson, rather grudgingly.
Khorobrov opened the book and read, The Count of Monte Cristo.
He was so staggered he could only give a whistle.
“Borisych,” he asked tenderly, “is there anybody after you? Can I have it
later?”
Abramson took his glasses off and thought a bit.
“We’ll see. Can you give me a haircut today?”
The prisoners didn’t like the visiting Stakhanovite barber. Enthusiastic
amateur barbers from among their own number would cater to every whim,
taking their time because they had plenty of it ahead of them.
“Who can we get a pair of scissors from?”
“I’ll get Zyablik’s.”
“All right, I’ll do it.”
“Good. The bit up to page 128 comes out. I’ll give it to you shortly.”
Noting that Abramson was on page 110, Khorobrov went into the hallway for
his smoke in a more cheerful frame of mind.
Gleb was fuller all the time of the holiday spirit. Somewhere, probably in the
student dormitory at Stromynka, Nadya, too, would be feeling excited in this
last hour before their meeting. When you meet, you can’t collect your thoughts;
you forget all that you meant to say. Better write it down, memorize it, burn the
scrap of paper; they wouldn’t let me take it in with me. Just remember that
there are eight points. Point 1: I may be going away. Point 2: My sentence
won’t end when it’s supposed to; there will be a period of exile to follow.
Point 3. . . .
He hurried down to the clothes storeroom and ironed his dickey. The dickey,
Ruska Doronin’s invention, had been adopted by many others. It was a piece of
white material (obtained by tearing a sheet into sixteen pieces, but the orderly
in charge of the linen closet did not know that) with a white collar stitched
onto it. This bit of cloth was just big enough to fit into the opening at the neck
of your overalls and conceal the “MGB Special Prison No. 1” stamp on your
undershirt. There were, in addition, two strings, to be tied behind your back.
The dickey helped to create the generally desired appearance of well-being. It
was simple to wash, it served faithfully on workdays or holidays, and you
were not ashamed to be seen in it by the females among the institute’s free
employees.
Next, Nerzhin stood on the stairs and tried in vain to give his scuffed shoes a
shine, using somebody’s dried-up and crumbling polish. (The prison did not
provide a change of shoes on visiting days; shoes could not be seen under the
table.)
When he went back into the room to shave (even straight razors were
allowed in this place, so haphazard were the regulations), Khorobrov was
already reading avidly. The designer’s extensive darning operations had
spread from the bed to the floor. Abramson, turning his head slightly away
from his book, peered down from his pillow to give instructions.
“Darning is only effective when it is carried out conscientiously. God forbid
that you should adopt a formal attitude to it. Don’t hurry; keep your stitches
close together; go over every place cross-darning twice. Another common
error is using the broken stitches around the edges of a ragged hole. Don’t try
to do it on the cheap; don’t worry about a few odd snippets; trim the edges of
the hole neatly. Have you ever heard the name Berkalov?”
“Who? Berkalov? No.”
“You do surprise me! Berkalov was an old-time artillery officer, the inventor
of the BS-3 cannon—you know, that marvelous cannon with the simply crazy
muzzle velocity. Well, then, Berkalov was sitting one Sunday, just as you are
now, in a sharashka darning his socks. Somebody turned the radio on:
‘Berkalov, Lieutenant General—Stalin Prize, First Class.’ He’d only been a
major general when he was arrested. Well, he finished darning his socks and
started making himself some fritters on a hotplate. In came a guard, caught him
at it, took the illegal hotplate away from him, and made out a report to the
commandant recommending three days in the hole. But at that very moment the
commandant himself ran in like an excited schoolboy: ‘Berkalov! Get your
things together! You’re off to the Kremlin! Kalinin is asking for you!’ That’s the
sort of thing that can happen to a man in Russia.”