Chapter-46-The-Castle-of-the-Holy-Grail

FOR HALF THE DAY a dull cloud hung low over Moscow, and it was not cold.
But when the seven prisoners stepped out of the blue bus into the exercise
yard, just in time for dinner, the first impatient snowflakes were making their
lonely flight.
One of them, a regular hexagonal ministar, fell on the sleeve of Nerzhin’s
rusty old army coat. He stood still in the middle of the yard gulping fresh air.
Senior Lieutenant Shusterman happened to be there and warned him that
since this was not an exercise period, he had better go indoors. Nerzhin was
put out. He did not wish to, he simply could not, talk about his wife’s visit,
didn’t want to confide in anybody or seek anybody’s sympathy. Did not want to
talk at all or to listen. All that he wanted was to be alone and to rerun through
his mind all the impressions he had brought back with him before they blurred
and became mere memories.
But solitude is the last thing you are likely to find in a sharashka or any other
prison camp. Everywhere you went—in the cells, the “convicts’
compartments” and cattle trucks on trains, huts in the camps, hospital wards—
there were always people, people, people: people you knew and people you
didn’t want to know, thin people, fat people . . . but always people and more
people.
On his way into the building (by the special entrance for prisoners, down
wooden steps and along the basement hallway), Nerzhin paused to think where
he should go next.
He had an idea.
He took the back stairs, which hardly anybody used, and went up past the
broken chairs stacked there to the top landing on the third floor.
This landing had been converted to a studio for a prisoner named
Kondrashov-Ivanov. He had no connection with the general work of the
sharashka and was kept on as a sort of serf-artist. The vestibules and halls of
the main building were spacious and needed pictorial adornment. Less
spacious but more numerous were the private apartments of Deputy Minister
Foma Guryanovich and his close colleagues, and these were still more urgently
in need of large, beautiful, cost-free pictures.
Not that Kondrashov-Ivanov really satisfied these requirements: The pictures
he painted were big, all right, and cost nothing, but beautiful they were not. The
colonels and generals who came to view his gallery wasted their breath
dinning into him how he ought to paint and what colors he should use, then
accepted with a sigh what was on offer. Besides, his pictures improved greatly
when mounted in gilt frames.
On his way up, Nerzhin passed a large canvas commissioned for the
vestibule of the main building: A. S. Popov Demonstrates the First RadioTelegraph
to Admiral Makarov. As he turned onto the last flight and before he
saw the artist, he caught sight of a painting high up on a blank wall: The
Blasted Oak. A finished picture two meters high, which for some reason none
of the artist’s patrons had wanted.
Other canvases hung along the walls of the stairwell. There were some on
easels. The light came from two windows, one on the north, the other on the
west side. The Iron Mask’s little window, with its grating and its little pink
curtain, looked out on the landing itself, which was as near as it got to the light
of day.
There was nothing else to be seen, not even a chair. Instead, there were two
logs standing on end, one higher than the other.
The stairway was inadequately heated, the studio was always damp and
cold, but Kondrashov-Ivanov’s sleeveless jacket lay on the floor, and he
himself stood motionless, tall and erect, with his arms and his legs sticking out
of his skimpy overalls, not, apparently, freezing. The big glasses, which made
his face large and stern, were pressed firmly down over his ears to allow for
his abrupt twists and turns at a picture, brush in one hand, palette in the other,
held at arm’s length.
He looked around when he heard cautious steps.
Their eyes met, but their minds were still elsewhere.
The artist was not altogether pleased to see a visitor; just now he needed
solitude and silence.
Yet he was more pleased than not, and there was no falsity in his hearty
welcome. “Gleb Vikentich! Welcome!” Hospitable hands flourished brush and
palette.
Good nature is a dubious asset for an artist; it enriches his imagination but
wrecks his routine.
Nerzhin hesitated in embarrassment on the next-to-last step. He spoke almost
in a whisper, as though there were some third person whom he feared to
awaken.
“No, please, Ippolit Mikhalych! I’ve only come. . . . I hope you don’t mind.
. . . I wanted to be quiet for a bit.”
“Yes, yes, of course!”
The artist nodded and said no more, perhaps remembering or reading in his
eyes that Nerzhin had been to see a visitor. He retreated with a sort of bow,
pointing with brush and palette to one of the stumps.
Nerzhin gathered up his coattails, which he had saved from shortening in the
camp, and sank onto the stump, leaning back against the banisters. As much as
he wanted to, he did not light a cigarette.
The artist’s gaze was fixed again on the same spot in his picture.
They were silent.
Reawakened affection for his wife was a faint, pleasurable ache in Nerzhin’s
breast.
He felt as though his fingers, where they had touched her hands, her neck, her
hair in farewell, were dusted with some precious pollen.
Year after year, you live deprived of what should be every man’s right on this
earth.
You are left with your mind (if any), your beliefs (if you are mature enough to
have acquired any), and you are chock-full of concern for the general good.
You might be a citizen of ancient Athens, a complete human being.
Only, the one thing needful is missing.
That one thing, the love of a woman, of which you are deprived, seems more
momentous than all the world besides.
Those simple words—“Do you love me?” “Yes. Do you love me?”—
unspoken except in looks or soundless movements of the lips, now fill your
heart with quiet rejoicing.
At that moment Gleb could not remember or imagine any fault in his wife.
She had all the virtues. And above all—loyalty.
A pity he had hesitated to kiss her at the beginning of the visit. Now that kiss
was lost beyond recall.
Her lips were slack; she had forgotten how to kiss. She looked exhausted,
like a hunted creature. How desperate she must be, to talk of divorce!
A legal divorce? Gleb had no objection. Tearing up a piece of officially
stamped paper would mean nothing to him. The union of souls was no concern
of the state. Nor, for that matter, was the union of bodies.
But he had been bruised and battered enough by life to know that events have
their own inexorable logic. People never dream what the perverse
consequences of their routine actions may be. Take Popov. When he invented
radio, did he realize that he was letting loose pandemonium, inflicting torture
by loudspeaker on solitary thinkers? Or take the Germans, who let Lenin
through to bring down Russia and thirty years later found their own country
split in two. Or take Alaska; they had been stupid enough to sell it for a song,
and now Soviet tanks could not reach America over land! Such trivialities
could determine the fate of the planet.
Or take Nadya. She wanted a divorce to escape from persecution. But once
divorced, she would be married again before she knew it.
His heart had sunk when her ringless fingers had waved good-bye to him.
That was how people said good-bye forever.
Nerzhin sat there in silence, and the excessive joy he had felt after the visit,
the joy that had filled him to overflowing in the bus, gradually ebbed, banished
by sober and gloomy thoughts. But this restored his mental equilibrium, and he
was soon Nerzhin the old zek again.
“It suits you here,” she had said.
Prison suited him!
It was true.
He did not really regret the five years he had spent inside. Even now, before
he could see them in perspective, Nerzhin recognized that they were a uniquely
necessary part of his life.
Where could you get a better view of the Russian Revolution than through the
bars it had set in place?
What better place to get to know people?
And yourself.
Only the iron-hard path ordained for him could have spared him so many
false steps, so much youthful vacillation.
This dreamer, Kondrashov-Ivanov, so impervious to the cruel jokes of the
age, what had he lost by being imprisoned? He could not of course wander
about the Moscow countryside with his paintbox. He had no table for still
lifes. Exhibitions? He had never known how to “arrange” one for himself and
in half a century had never shown a single picture in a reputable gallery.
Money for his pictures? He had never been paid, even outside. Appreciative
viewers? He probably attracted more of them here. A studio? Outside, he
hadn’t had anything as good as this. A single long, narrow room like a hallway
had served him as studio and living quarters. To make room to work, he had to
stack chair upon chair and roll up the mattress, so that callers asked whether he
was moving. They had had only one table, so when a still life was set up on it,
he and his wife ate off chairs until the picture was finished.
During the war there had been no oil for paints, and he had mixed his colors
with rationed sunflower oil. He had to earn his ration cards, and they sent him
to a chemical warfare division to paint portraits of women soldiers who
obtained the best grades on military and political courses. Ten portraits were
commissioned, but he chose just one of the ten best girls and wore her out with
long sittings. Even so, his version of her was not at all what the top brass
wanted to see, and Moscow 1941, as the picture was called, found no takers.
Yet the essence of 1941 was in that portrait. A girl in an anti-gas suit. Her
head was thrown back, and she stared wildly at something hideous, something
unforgivable before her. But this was no weak, girlish figure! Hands trained for
battle gripped the sling of her gas mask. The dark gray anti-gas suit, with its
stiff creases and silvery glint where the light caught its folds, looked like a suit
of armor. Nobility, cruelty, and vengefulness had come together and were
engraved on the face of this determined Komsomol from Kaluga, this far-frombeautiful
girl in whom Kondrashov-Ivanov had seen a Joan of Arc!
It was, you might think, very much in the spirit of the wartime slogan “We
shall not forget! We shall not forgive!” but it went too far; it showed something
savage, uncontrollable. It was rejected and never exhibited. It stood for years
in the artist’s little room, with its face to the wall, and went on standing there
until he was arrested.
Leonid Andreev’s son, Daniil, had written a novel and asked a couple of
dozen friends to hear it. A Thursday salon, nineteenth-century style. That novel
cost every member of the audience twenty-five years in a corrective labor
camp. One of those who heard the seditious work was Kondrashov-Ivanov,
great-grandson of the Decembrist Kondrashov, sentenced to twenty years for
his part in the 1825 rising and remembered for the touching behavior of a
French governess who loved him and followed him to Siberia.
True, Kondrashov-Ivanov did not end up in a camp. As soon as he had signed
the receipt for his sentence, he was taken to Marfino and put to work, painting
a picture a month on Foma Guryanovich’s orders. In the past twelve months he
had painted the pictures hanging there and others that had been removed. With
fifty years behind him and twenty-five ahead, he had not lived but flitted
effortlessly through that halcyon year, not knowing whether there would ever
be such another. He did not notice what he was given to eat or to wear or how
often his head was counted among all those others.
He was, of course, deprived of opportunities to meet and talk to other artists.
Or to look at their pictures. Or to find out from albums of reproductions
filtering through customs what direction painting was taking in the West.
Wherever it was going, it could have no influence on, no relevance to, the
work of Kondrashov-Ivanov because, in the magic pentagram where all
discoveries were made and all creation took place, all five angles were
occupied once and for all: two by drawing and color, as only he could see
them, two by universal good and universal evil, and the fifth by the artist
himself.
He could not return on his own two legs to the landscapes he had once seen
or with his own hands reproduce the same still lifes, but he had begun to see
them more clearly and in their true colors in cells half darkened by “muzzles,”
and those he had never painted before he could paint now from memory.
One of these still lifes, based on the four-by-five ratio of the Egyptian square
—Kondrashov attached very great importance to the proportions of the sides—
was hanging right then next to Mamurin’s window. Half of its surface was
taken up by a brightly polished round copper tray standing up on edge. It was
just an ordinary tray, but its effect was that of a hero’s blazing shield. By it
stood a jug of some dark metal, beaten and burnished, probably meant to hold
water, not wine. And on the wall behind them was draped a piece of golden
yellow brocade (Kondrashov was particularly attracted by all shades of
yellow just now) that could be seen as the mantle of the invisible. There was
something in the combination of these three objects that inspired courage and
forbade retreat.
(The colonels had all refused this still life, insisting that the tray should be
laid down flat and a cut melon or something of the sort placed on it.)
Kondrashov worked on several pictures at once, leaving them and coming
back to them from time to time. He had never brought a picture to the stage at
which his craftsman’s eye could judge it perfect. He did not know for sure that
there was such a stage. He always abandoned a picture when he no longer saw
anything special in it, when his eye was so used to it that the changes he might
make seemed more trivial at every return and he realized that he might be
spoiling it rather than improving it.
He turned it to the wall, covered it up. The picture was rejected, estranged
from him. But when he surrendered it gratis to hang amid pomp and luxury, he
looked at it with a fresh eye, and the pang of parting was mingled with delight.
If nobody saw it again, he had still painted it!
Nerzhin, all attention now, started inspecting Kondrashov’s last picture. A
wintry brook occupied the main place in it. It was almost impossible to tell
which way the brook was flowing. In fact, it was hardly flowing at all; a film
of ice was beginning to form on its surface. There were brownish tints in the
shallows, reflected from fallen leaves covering the bottom. The first snow lay
in patches on both banks, and the grass in between was brown and withered.
Two willows grew by the brook, wraithlike and misty, wet from the powdery
snow melting into them. But the most important part of the picture was the
background: a dense rampart of olive-black firs with a single helpless birch
gleaming in the front rank. Its gentle yellow glow made the host of sentinel
conifers, with their sharp pikes raised skyward, look denser and darker still.
The sky was a motley scrabble, and the setting sun was muffled by ragged
cloud, which it was too weak to pierce with a direct ray. The focal point of the
picture was not this either. It was the chill water of the standing brook. It had
fullness and depth. It was leaden yet translucent, and it looked very cold. It
seemed to hold the balance between autumn and winter.
This was the picture on which the painter was now intent.
Artistic creation is subject to an inexorable law, which Kondrashov knew
only too well. He had struggled against it but had ended by helplessly
submitting. This law said that nothing he had done before had any value, none
of it counted, none of it reflected credit on him. Only the picture on which he
was working then and there was the summation of a lifetime’s experience, the
zenith of his powers, the one and only touchstone of his talent!
And he could see that it was not going to work!
But none of his previous pictures had been “going to work” until, briefly, it
did. Now past despair was forgotten; this was the first time he had ever
seemed to be learning to paint properly. And still it wasn’t working; his whole
life was a failure; he had never had any talent at all!
That water, now—it looked liquid and cold and deep and still, but none of
that meant anything if it did not convey the wisdom, the completeness, the
serenity that Kondrashov could never find in his passionate self but recognized
and revered in nature. Did his water convey that sublime serenity, or didn’t it?
Miserably, hopelessly he struggled to decide. Did it, didn’t it. . . ?
“Do you know, Ippolit Mikhailovich, you’ve more or less convinced me.
These places of yours are Russia.”
Kondrashov-Ivanov looked around sharply, “And not the Caucasus?”
His spectacles sat as firmly on his nose as if they were welded to it.
Though not the weightiest of his concerns, it had a certain importance. Many
people were perplexed by Kondrashov’s landscapes, finding them Caucasian
rather than Russian. Perhaps because they were too majestic, too awesome.
“I feel sure such places can be found in Russia,” Nerzhin said still more
positively.
He rose from the stump and made the round of the landing inspecting
Morning of an Unusual Day and other landscapes.
The artist nodded excitedly. “Of course, of course! Can be found and have
been found! I could take you there if we didn’t need an escort! The fact is that
the public is under the spell of Levitan! We are used to seeing the Russian
landscape through Levitan’s eyes, not unpleasant in its humble way but
monotonous, featureless. But if there’s nothing more to Russia, where did her
self-burners come from? The mutinous streltsy? Peter the First? The
Decembrists? The People’s Will Party?”
“Uh-huh,” Nerzhin said approvingly. “You’re right there. But all the same,
Ippolit Mikhailovich, I don’t understand your passion for hyperbole. That
crippled oak, for instance. Why does it have to be on the brink of a precipice?
I feel sure there’s an abyss down below—nothing less would satisfy you. And
the sky isn’t just stormy; it looks like a sky that has never known the sun. And
all the hurricanes that ever blew anywhere in the last two hundred years have
passed this way, twisting the tree’s branches and struggling to claw it loose
from the cliff. You’re a Shakespearean, of course; anything evil must be
inordinately evil. But that’s ancient history. Statistically very few people find
themselves in such situations. There’s no need to spell ‘good’ and ‘evil’ with
capital letters.”
“I can’t listen to such stuff!” The artist waved his long arms angrily. “Evil is
ancient history, you say? Evil never really put in an appearance before our
century. In Shakespeare’s time what passed for evildoing was sport for callow
youths! We ought to spell Good and Evil not just with capitals but with letters
five stories high, letters that flash like lighthouses! Let’s not split hairs!
Statistically few! What about you and me and the rest of us here? And how
many millions are there like us?”
“Well, yes . . .” Nerzhin said, shaking his head doubtfully. “If we’re in a
camp and we’re invited to sell whatever conscience we have left for two
hundred grams of black bread. . . . But that has no resonance, so to speak; it
somehow doesn’t show. . . .”
Kondrashov-Ivanov stood up still straighter, rose to his full not
inconsiderable height. He gazed at something higher still ahead of him, like
Egmont led to execution. “Prison camp should never break a man’s spirit!”
Nerzhin laughed wryly.
“Shouldn’t, perhaps, but it does. You haven’t been in a camp yet, so you can’t
judge. You don’t know how they crunch our fragile bones in the camps. It
doesn’t matter what you’re like when you go in; you come out changed beyond
recognition. As everybody knows, being determines consciousness.”
“No, no, no!” Kondrashov-Ivanov spread his long arms, ready then and there
to wrestle with the whole world. “No! No! No! That would be too degrading!
If that were true, life wouldn’t be worthwhile! If it is so, tell me, why do
lovers remain faithful to each other when they’re parted? ‘Being’ demands that
they be unfaithful! And why do people in exactly the same circumstances, in the
same camp even, behave so differently? Who can know for sure whether life
molds man or the strong and noble human being molds life!”
Nerzhin was quietly confident that his experience of life was worth more
than the fantasies of this ageless idealist. But he could not help admiring his
sentiments.
“Every man is born with a sort of inner essence,” Kondrashov said. “It is, so
to speak, the innermost core of the man, his essential self. No ‘being,’ nothing
extraneous, can determine him. Moreover, every man carries within himself an
image of perfection, which is never dimmed and which sometimes stands out
with remarkable clarity! And reminds him of his chivalrous duty!”
Nerzhin had by now returned to his seat on the log. He scratched the back of
his head. “That’s another thing,” he said. “Why do you go in for all these
knights and their knightly trappings? You seem to me to go too far, though Mitya
Sologdin, of course, likes it. Your antiaircraft girl is a knight in armor; your
copper tray is a shield. . . .”
“What?” Kondrashov was amazed. “You don’t like it? I go too far, do I? Haha-ha!”
Operatic laughter echoed in the hollow stairwell like thunder in a
mountain gorge. As though about to ride him down, he thrust out an arm toward
Nerzhin, and his pointing finger was the head of his leveled lance.
“Who was it who expelled the knights from our lives? Lovers of money and
trade. Lovers of orgies and feasting! What is it our age most lacks? Party
members? No, sir, it lacks knights! In the days of chivalry, there were no
concentration camps! No gas chambers!”
Suddenly he was silent. In a single movement he alighted softly from his
steed and sank into a squatting position beside his visitor. His glasses flashed
as he asked in a whisper: “Would you like me to show you something?”
Arguments with artists always end that way.
“Yes, of course.”
Kondrashov, still stooping, shuffled off into a corner, pulled out a small
canvas on a stretcher, and brought it over, keeping the gray obverse side
toward Nerzhin.
“You know who Parsifal was?” he asked in a low voice.
“Wasn’t he connected with Lohengrin?”
“His father. The guardian of the Holy Grail. I try to visualize that precise
moment. The moment any man may experience, when he first catches sight of
the image of perfection. . . .”
Kondrashov closed his eyes and drew in his lips. He had to prepare himself,
too.
Nerzhin wondered why what he was about to see was so small.
The artist raised his eyelids.
“It’s only a sketch. A sketch for the most important picture in my life. I will
probably never paint it. It’s the moment when Parsifal first caught sight of the
. . . castle of the Holy . . . Grail!”
The picture was twice as high as it was wide. It showed a wedge-shaped
crevice between two converging mountain precipices. On each of them, to the
right and to the left, the trees on the fringe of a dense, primeval forest edged
into the picture. Creeping bracken and ugly shrubs clung to the very edges and
even the perpendicular walls of the two cliffs. High on the cliff to the left a
light gray horse had emerged from the forest carrying a rider in a helmet and a
scarlet cloak. The horse was not afraid of the abyss. Its hoof was raised ready,
in obedience to the rider’s will, either to back away or to cross the abyss; it
had the strength to leap as though winged.
The rider himself had no eyes for the abyss before his horse. He was staring,
in rapt amazement, into the depths of the picture, where an orange-gold
radiance suffused the whole expanse of the sky above, emanating perhaps from
the sun, perhaps from a still purer source concealed by the castle. Stepped and
turreted, growing out of the stepped mountain and visible also from below
through the cleft between the cliffs, between the trees and the ferns, rising to a
needle point in mid-heaven at the top of the picture, hazy and indistinct, as if
spun from shifting cloud, yet discernible in all the details of its unearthly
perfection, ringed in a blue-gray aureole by the invisible supersun, stood the
castle of the Holy Grail.