Chapter-67-Spiridon

ROUNDHEADED SPIRIDON, on whose face only a practiced eye could
distinguish respect from mockery, had aroused Nerzhin’s interest as soon as he
arrived in the sharashka. There had been carpenters and mechanics and turners
there before him, but Spiridon’s unspoiled naturalness made him different.
Here, without a doubt, was a representative of the People on whose wisdom
Nerzhin could draw.
He felt, however, a certain awkwardness. He could find no excuse for getting
to know Spiridon more closely. He had at first nothing to talk to him about,
they did not meet at work, and they lived in different parts of the prison. The
small group of manual laborers lived in a separate room and spent their leisure
hours apart from other prisoners, so that, when Nerzhin started visiting
Spiridon, they all, Spiridon among them, decided that he was a wolf on the
prowl, seeking prey for the godfather.
Spiridon considered himself the least important person in the sharashka and
could not imagine why operations officers should be targeting him, but since
they turned up their noses at no carrion, he had to be on his guard. When
Nerzhin came into the room, Spiridon would light up with pretended joy, make
room for him on the bunk, and with a stupid look on his face start talking about
something a million miles from politics: how to catch a spawning fish with a
spike or catch it by the gills with a forked stick in still water or lure it into a
net; how he had hunted “elk and brown bears” (but better steer clear of “the
black bear with a white tie”!); how lungwort is used to get rid of snakes, while
the “woodpecker herb” is “mighty good for mowing.” Then there was the long
story of his courtship of Marfa Ustinovna in the twenties, when she belonged to
the drama group at the village club; her parents wanted to marry her off to a
rich miller, but she loved Spiridon and eloped with him, and they were
secretly married on St. Peter’s day.
While Spiridon was telling him all this, those sore eyes hardly moved. They
seemed to say from under his bushy ginger eyebrows, “Why do you keep
coming here, wolf? You can see for yourself you’ll get slim pickings.”
In fact, any stoolie would have despaired long ago and abandoned this
uncooperative victim. Nobody could have been so curious about Spiridon’s
hunting career as to come along and listen patiently to his revelations every
Sunday evening.
But Nerzhin, who, to begin with, felt shy when he looked in on Spiridon, was
also the Nerzhin with an insatiable longing to solve here in prison problems he
had not thought through as a free man. He kept it up month after month and, far
from wearying of Spiridon’s stories, felt refreshed by them; they were like the
breath of a river at dawn, like the breeze that freshens a field in the afternoon,
and they took him back to that unique seven years in the life of Russia, the
seven years of the New Economic Policy, the equal and the like of which
Russia had never known from the time of the first clearings in the primeval
forest, long before the coming of Rurik’s men, to the most recent “disamalgamation”
of collective farms. Nerzhin had caught a glimpse of that time
while he was still too young to understand, and he greatly regretted not having
been born a bit earlier.
Abandoning himself to Spiridon’s warm, husky voice, Nerzhin never once
tried to trick him into talking about politics. So Spiridon gradually began to
trust him and plunged into the past without being forced to it. He was no longer
inhibited by constant wariness, the deep furrows in his brow disappeared, and
a quiet smile played on his ruddy face.
Only his impaired eyesight prevented Spiridon from reading in the sharashka.
Occasionally, in an attempt to adapt his own speech to Nerzhin’s, he would
work in words such as “principle,” “period,” and “analogously,” usually in the
wrong place. In the days when Marfa Ustinovna had performed with the village
drama circle, he had heard the name “Yesenin” from the stage, and it had
remained in his memory.
“Yesenin?” Nerzhin said in surprise. “Great stuff! I’ve got his poems here in
the sharashka. They’re hard to come by nowadays.” And he took along the little
book in a jacket carpeted with embossed autumn maple leaves. Could it be that
a miracle was about to happen? he wondered. Would the semiliterate Spiridon
understand Yesenin?
No miracle took place. Spiridon didn’t remember a line of what he had
heard. But he greatly enjoyed “Tanyusha Was Oh, So Pretty” and “Threshing.”
Two days later Major Shikin called Nerzhin in and ordered him to hand over
Yesenin for censorial inspection. Nerzhin never discovered who had informed
on him. But now that he had clearly been victimized by the godfather and lost
his Yesenin, more or less because of Spiridon, Gleb was finally seen to be
trustworthy. Spiridon began to talk to him as an equal and a friend, and their
conversations no longer took place in the room but under the stairs inside the
main prison building, where nobody could hear them.
On the last five or six Sunday evenings, Spiridon’s stories had given Nerzhin
glimpses of the profundity for which he had longed. The life of a Russian
peasant, indistinguishable from millions of others, who had been seventeen in
the year of the Revolution and just over forty when the war with Hitler began,
unfolded before Nerzhin’s eyes.
Hurricanes had raged around him. He had become head of the family at
fourteen (his father was called up for the war with Germany and killed in
action) and had gone out to mow with the old men. (“I learned to use a scythe
in half a day.”) At sixteen he was employed in a glassworks and marching to
open-air meetings under red banners when it was announced that the land now
belonged to the peasants. Spiridon rushed back to his village and took a plot.
That year he and his mother, younger brother, and sisters strained every sinew,
and by the Feast of the Protectress, they had corn for the winter. But after
Christmas the authorities started forcibly exacting all the grain they could for
the towns: Come on, hand it over, more, more, more. Then after Easter,
Spiridon’s year was called up—the eighteens, and he’d just turned nineteen.
The Red Army was about to grab him. But Spiridon saw no advantage in
leaving his land for the army, so he and some of the other village lads took off
into the woods and became “Greens” (“Leave us alone and we’ll leave you
alone”). Later on, though, it wasn’t safe even out in the woods. So they went
over to the Whites, who had popped up briefly in their district. The Whites
interrogated them, wanted to know if there was a commissar among them.
There was no commissar, so the Whites knocked the ringleader on the head to
encourage the others, made them wear tricolor cockades, and gave them rifles.
The Whites generally did things in the old way, as under the tsar. After they’d
fought for the Whites a bit, Spiridon and his comrades were taken prisoner by
the Reds. (They didn’t put up much resistance; in fact, they gave themselves
up.)
The Reds shot the officers and ordered the rankers to remove the cockades
from their caps and put on armbands. Spiridon remained with the Reds till the
end of the Civil War. He had fought in Poland, too, and after that his unit had
become part of the Labor Army. He had thought he would never get home. Then
at Shrovetide they were taken to Petersburg and in the first week of Lent
marched across the sea over the ice to capture some fortress. Only then did
Spiridon manage to get home.
He returned to his village in the spring and eagerly set to work on the patch
of land he had fought to make his own. Others came back from the war workshy
and all talk, but not Spiridon. He quickly put his holding on a firm footing
(“A good husbandman can walk down the yard and pick up a ruble”), married,
and got himself some horses.
The government itself was of two minds at the time. It looked to the poorer
peasants for support, but nobody wanted to join the ranks of the poor. Those
peasants who liked work were eager to better themselves. A new word was
borne in on the breeze: “intensifier.” It meant anyone who wanted to get the
best out of his farm without hired labor, relying on science and native wit. With
his wife’s help, Spiridon Yegorov became an “intensifier.”
“A good wife makes all the difference in life,” Spiridon always said. Marfa
Ustinovna was the joy of his life; marrying her was the luckiest thing he ever
did. Because of her he did not drink and hang around with idlers. She had
borne him three children in successive years, two sons and then a daughter, but
still pulled her weight, side by side with her husband, and their holding had
flourished. She was literate; she read a magazine called Be Your Own
Agronomist, and that was how Spiridon became an “intensifier.”
Intensifiers were made a fuss over; Spiridon and Marfa were given subsidies
and seed. They went from strength to strength, from well-off to better-off, and
began to think of building themselves a brick house, not knowing that their
good fortune was about to run out. Spiridon was generally respected; he sat on
the platform at meetings as a Civil War hero and by now a Party member.
At that point, their home was completely destroyed by fire; they barely
managed to rescue the children. They were left with nothing.
But they were given little time to grieve. They had scarcely begun to struggle
to their feet after the fire when a thunderclap came from distant Moscow. The
“intensifiers,” unthinkingly fostered by Moscow, were now just as unthinkingly
rechristened “kulaks” and weeded out. Marfa and Spiridon were glad that they
had not got around to building their brick house.
Fate had played one of its favorite tricks, and their misfortune proved to be a
blessing.
Spiridon Yegorov might easily have been marched off by the GPU to die in
the tundra, but instead he was appointed commissar for collectivization to herd
the people into collective farms. He took to wearing a minatory revolver on his
hip, personally evicted people from their houses, and sent them off under
police escort, empty-handed, without belongings, kulaks and nonkulaks alike.
Spiridon’s behavior at this and at other critical moments in his career defied
easy explanation or class analysis. Nerzhin did not reproach him, not wanting
to reopen old wounds, and anyway it was easy to see that all this had left
Spiridon troubled at heart. He had started drinking—and drank as though the
whole village had once been his—and now he was messing up everything. He
had accepted the rank of commissar but neglected his duties. He turned a blind
eye to the peasants who killed off their beasts and entered the kolkhoz without
hoof or horn to their name.
For all this, Spiridon was dismissed, and they did not stop at that; he was
ordered to put his hands behind his back, and two militiamen, one behind and
one in front, revolvers drawn, marched him off to jail. He was tried quickly
(“In our whole pe-ri-od they’ve never wasted time trying people”), given ten
years for “economic counterevolution,” and sent off to the White Sea Canal
and, after that was finished, to the Moscow-Volga Canal. There Spiridon
worked at times as a manual laborer and at times as a carpenter. He got good
rations, and it was only for Marfa, left behind with their three children, that his
heart ached.
But then Spiridon’s case was reopened. The charge of “economic
counterrevolution” was changed to “dereliction of duty,” and as a result he
became a “class ally” instead of a “class enemy.” He was called in and
informed that he would now be entrusted with a rifle to stand guard over his
fellow prisoners. Only yesterday Spiridon, like any decent zek, had abused the
escort troops with the vilest of language and the convicts among them with
words even stronger, but he now took the proffered rifle and marched out his
comrades of yesterday under escort, because this shortened the term of his
imprisonment and gave him forty rubles a month to send home.
Before long, the camp commandant was congratulating him on his release.
Spiridon got his documents made out, not for a kolkhoz but for a factory at
Pochep. He collected Marfa and the children and was soon appearing on the
factory honors board as one of the best glassblowers. He did all the overtime
he could to recoup his losses from the fire. Husband and wife began to think
about a little cottage with a garden and further schooling for their children. The
children were fifteen, fourteen, and thirteen when the war broke out. The front
moved quickly toward the settlement in which they lived. The authorities
evacuated everybody they could to the East, the whole population of Pochep
included.
At every turning point in Spiridon’s life story, Nerzhin awaited the next
surprise with bated breath. He half expected to hear that Spiridon, resenting as
he must his years in camp, had stayed behind to await the Germans. Not at all.
Spiridon had behaved at first as people do in the best patriotic novels: He
buried his belongings, and as soon as the factory equipment was evacuated by
rail and the workers given carts, he put his wife and three children on one of
them and—“It isn’t my horse and it isn’t my whip, so off we go and I’ll never
say ‘whoa’ ”—retreated from Pochep all the way to Kaluga, with thousands of
others.
But near Kaluga something went wrong, and their column broke up. There
were now only hundreds of them rather than thousands. Moreover, the men
were to be enlisted at the first recruiting office along the route and their
families sent on without them.
As soon as it became clear that he faced separation from his family, sure as
ever that he was doing the right thing, Spiridon took to the woods, waited till
the front had rolled past, put his family on the same old cart, pulled by the
same horse, except that it was no longer state property but his very own to
keep, and took them all the way back to Pochep and from there to his native
village, where he settled in a deserted hut. He was told to take as much of the
former kolkhoz land as he could work—and to work it. Spiridon plowed and
sowed with no qualms of conscience, ignoring the war bulletins, working
steadily and confidently, as though he was back in the far-off years when there
was no kolkhoz and no war.
Partisans came to him and said, “Pull yourself together, Spiridon; you should
be fighting, not plowing.” “Somebody has to plow,” Spiridon answered and
refused to leave the land. They tried to force people to join the Partisans. As
he explained it now, it wasn’t enough that young and old would just as soon be
creeping up on the Germans, knife between teeth, as sit at home chewing their
crusts; no, what happened was that instructors from Moscow were parachuted
in to drive the peasants out with threats or fatally compromise them.
The Partisans managed to kill a German dispatch rider right in the middle of
the village. They knew the German rules. The Germans drove in immediately,
turned the people out of their houses, and burned the whole village to the
ground.
Once again Spiridon did not hesitate. The time had come to settle accounts
with the Germans. He took Marfa and the children to her mother and hurried
off to join the same group of Partisans in the forest. He was given an automatic
rifle and, working just as conscientiously and methodically as he had in the
factory and on the land, he picked off Germans patrolling the railway line,
attacked convoys, helped to blow up bridges, and visited his family at holiday
times. In spite of everything, he still had his family.
But the front was rolling back their way. They flattered themselves that
Spiridon would get a Partisan medal when Soviet troops arrived. It was even
announced that Partisans would be incorporated into the regular army and that
their days in the forest would soon be over.
Then a lad came running with the news that the Germans had moved all the
inhabitants from the village where Marfa was living.
Spiridon was not waiting for the Red Army or for anything else. Without a
word to anyone, he abandoned his gun and his two drums of ammunition and
rushed off to find his family. He merged with the flood of displaced people,
pretending to be a civilian, walking beside the same old cart, flicking the same
little horse with his whip. Sure as always that he was doing what was right and
proper, he trudged along the congested road from Pochep to Slutsk.
Nerzhin clutched his head and rocked from side to side.
“Dear oh dear oh dear! What extraordinary things you tell me, Spiridon
Danilych! I can’t take it all in. You went over the ice to Kronstadt; you were
one of those who set up this Soviet regime of ours; you forced people into the
collective farms. . . .”
“Well, didn’t you help to set it up?”
Nerzhin was at a loss for an answer. The conventional view was that his
father’s generation had established the regime and that in 1917, at that solemn
moment, every one of those heroes clearly realized what he was doing.
The smile on Spiridon’s lips grew broader.
“You helped set it up, all right. Didn’t you realize?”
“No, I didn’t,” Nerzhin whispered, going over in his mind his three years as
an officer at the front.
“Well, it’s like that sometimes; we plant rye, and what comes up is
goosegrass.”
But Nerzhin wanted to get on with his sociological investigation.
“What happened next, Spiridon Danilych?”
What happened next?!
He could, of course, have made a break for the forest yet again. He tried it
once, but there was a hair-raising encounter with bandits, and he narrowly
saved his daughter from them. So he stayed with the column. Besides, he had
begun to realize that the Soviet authorities would not believe him, would
remember that he hadn’t joined the Partisans right away and that he had
deserted. He decided that he might as well be hanged for a sheep as for a lamb
and went all the way to Slutsk. There they were put on trains and given food
coupons to last them as far as the Rhineland. At first, the whisper went around
that children could not be taken, and Spiridon started looking for a chance to
turn back. But everyone was accepted, so he abandoned his horse and cart
without a second thought and joined the train. He and the two boys were
assigned to a factory near Mainz, and his wife and daughter were sent to work
for farmers.
One day at the factory a German foreman struck Spiridon’s younger son.
Without stopping to think, Spiridon jumped up and threatened the foreman with
an ax. Under German law Spiridon could have been shot. But the foreman
calmed down, went up to the mutineer, and, as Spiridon now told the story,
said: “I myself—Vater, I you—verstehe.”
He did not report the matter, and Spiridon learned soon afterward that the
foreman had that very morning received notification of his son’s death in
Russia.
Remembering that foreman in the Rhineland, the case-hardened Spiridon was
not ashamed to wipe a tear away with his sleeve.
“Since then I’ve never been angry with the Germans. They burned my house
down and did all those other bad things, but that Vater wiped the slate clean.
He had a heart, that man! There’s another sort of German for you!”
That was one of the rare, the very rare, events to shake the redheaded
peasant’s dogged certainty that he was always right. Otherwise, through all the
difficult years, through all the cruel vicissitudes, self-doubt had never
unmanned Spiridon at the decisive moment. Spiridon Yegorov was horrifyingly
ignorant, his mind was closed to the highest creations of the human spirit and
human society, but his actions and decisions were marked by a steady and
unwavering common sense. For instance, knowing that the Germans would
have shot all the village dogs, he calmly buried the severed head of a cow in
light snow, something he would never have done ordinarily. Needless to say,
he had never studied geography or German, but when they were digging
trenches in Alsace and things started getting rough (to top it all, the Americans
were raining down bombs on them), he took his older son and ran away. He
couldn’t read German signs or ask anyone the way. He lay low in the daytime
and traveled only by night, over unknown country, as the crow flies, avoiding
roads, covered ninety kilometers, and crept from house to house till he found
the farm near Mainz where his wife was working. There he and his son holed
up in a bunker in the orchard until the Americans arrived.
Spiridon had never been teased by any of the eternally unanswerable
questions—whether sensory perception supplies true knowledge, whether we
are capable of knowing “things in themselves.” He was sure that he saw,
smelled, and understood things without possibility of error.
Spiridon’s moral code was just as uncomplicated and quietly confident. He
spoke ill of no one. He never bore false witness. He used foul language only
when necessary. He killed only when at war. He had got into fights only for his
bride. He wouldn’t steal a crumb or a rag from any other person, but he robbed
the state whenever opportunity offered, with a cool conviction that it was right.
He had, as he said, “sampled a few women” before his marriage—but didn’t
the great Aleksandr Pushkin confess that he found the commandment “Thou
shalt not covet thy neighbor’s wife” a particularly hard one to keep?
And now, fifty years old, a prisoner, almost blind, and obviously doomed to
die right here in prison, Spiridon showed no inclination to play the saint, to
despond, to repent, or—least of all—to “reform.” He simply took his busy
broom in his hands and swept the yard from dawn to dusk, day in and day out,
in a life-and-death struggle against the commandant and the operations officers.
Whoever the power holders were, Spiridon was always at odds with them.
What Spiridon loved was the land.
What Spiridon possessed was his family.
Concepts such as homeland, religion, and socialism, little used in ordinary
everyday conversation, might have been completely unknown to Spiridon. His
ears were deaf to them; he could not get his tongue around them.
To him, homeland meant family.
Religion meant family.
Even socialism meant family.
To all the disseminators of the rational and good and eternal, all the writers
who had called Spiridon and his like “God bearers” (though he was unaware
of it), the priests, the Social Democrats, the volunteer agitators and
professional propagandists, White landowners and Red kolkhoz chairmen who
had themselves dealt with Spiridon in the course of his life, he had just one
angry, but of necessity silent, message: “Why don’t you all go . . . !”