Chapter-45-The-Running-Dogs-of-Imperialism

KLARAAND THE OTHER GIRLS from the institute were subjected to a hairraising
briefing by the saturnine Major Shikin.
She learned that she would be working among most dangerous spies, running
dogs of world imperialism and the American Intelligence Service, who had
sold their motherland for a song.
Klara was assigned to the Vacuum Laboratory. This was the name given to
the laboratory that made to order the numerous electronic tubes required by the
other labs. The tubes were blown first in the little glassblowing shop next
door, then emptied of air by three humming vacuum pumps in the Vacuum
Laboratory proper, a large, dim room facing north. The pumps divided the
room like a row of cabinets. Electric bulbs burned there even in the daytime.
The floor was paved with flagstones, and the clatter of shoes and scraping of
chair legs never ceased. Each pump had its own vacuum man (a prisoner)
sitting or pacing beside it. Other prisoners sat at little desks in two or three
places. The only free employees were a girl named Tamara and the captain in
charge of the laboratory.
Klara had been introduced to this boss of hers in Yakonov’s office. He was a
plump, middle-aged Jew with an apathetic air. He made no attempt to frighten
Klara further, just nodded to her to follow him.
“You, of course, know nothing and can do nothing?” he asked her, out on the
stairway.
Klara mumbled something. As if being frightened was not enough, she would
now be put to shame, exposed at any moment as an ignoramus and made a
laughingstock.
She entered the lab inhabited by monsters in blue overalls as though it were a
cage of wild animals. She was afraid even to raise her eyes.
The three vacuum men really did look like caged animals, pacing beside
their pumps; they had an urgent order and had been denied sleep for two days
running. But the prisoner by the second pump, a man in his forties with a bald
spot and in need of a shave, stopped, beamed, and said:
“Hey! Reinforcements!”
Her fears vanished at once. There was so much simple good nature in this
exclamation that Klara had to make an effort not to smile in return.
The youngest of the vacuum men, the one with the smallest pump, also
stopped. He was hardly more than a boy, with a mischievous face and innocent
eyes. The look he gave Klara was that of a man taken aback. No young man had
ever looked at her like that before.
The oldest of the vacuum men was Dvoetyosov, whose pump, the huge one
farther down the room, hummed loudest of all. He was tall, ungainly, lean
except for his pendulous belly. He threw Klara a contemptuous glance from a
distance and retreated behind his cabinet, as though to spare himself the sight
of anything so disgusting.
Klara discovered later that there was no need to feel offended by this; he
was the same with all the free staff, and when any of the bosses came in, he
would deliberately switch on something noisy so that they would have to shout
above the din. He was unashamedly careless of his appearance, could turn up
with the last of his trouser buttons dangling loose at the end of a long thread or
with a hole in the back of his overalls, and would thrust his hand inside his
overalls to scratch with women present. He liked to say: “Look, this is my own
country! Why should I worry what anybody else thinks?”
The prisoners, even the young ones, called the middle vacuum man simply
Zemelya, which he didn’t seem to mind in the least. His was a “sunny nature,”
and he never stopped grinning from ear to ear. Watching him closely in the
weeks that followed, Klara noticed that he showed no regret for whatever was
lost beyond recall, whether it was an irretrievable pencil or his blighted life.
He was never angry about anything or with anyone; nor was he afraid of
anyone. He was a really good engineer, but his expertise was airplane engines.
He had been delivered to Marfino in error, had made himself at home, and was
in no hurry to move on, rightly considering that the next place was unlikely to
be better.
When the pumps were quieter in the evening, Zemelya liked to reminisce or
listen to someone else’s stories.
“You just took your five-kopeck piece and bought whatever you wanted,” he
said, smiling broadly. “Every step you took, there were people offering you
something. It was all good stuff. Nobody tried to sell you crap. If you bought
boots, they really were boots; they’d last ten years without a repair, or fifteen
repaired. They didn’t snip off the leather at the toecaps like they do now; they
took it under the welt so that it went right around the foot. Then there were
those fancy red boots—what did they call them?—with the crepe soles; it was
a treat to wear them.” He dissolved into smiles and screwed up his eyes, as
though he were looking at a warm but not very bright sun. “Or take railway
stations. . . . You never saw anybody lying on the floor, or sweltering all day
and night outside the ticket office. . . . It took you just one minute to buy a ticket
and get a seat; there was always room in the cars. They made the trains go fast;
they weren’t out to save coal. . . . That’s how it was; living was simple, very
simple in those days.”
The oldest vacuum man would waddle out of the dark corner where his desk
was safely hidden from the bosses, hands deep in pockets, to listen to these
stories. He would take his stand in the middle of the room, his protuberant eyes
looking quizzically at the speaker over his glasses.
“Zemelya, d’you mean to say you remember the tsar?”
“Just about,” Zemelya said, with an apologetic smile.
Dvoetyosov shook his head. “Well, you shouldn’t. We’re supposed to be
pumping for socialism.”
Zemelya timidly demurred. “We’ve been told socialism’s built already,
Kostya.”
“Eh?”
The senior vacuum man was popeyed with amazement.
“Yes, since 1933, or thereabouts.”
“You mean when there was that famine in the Ukraine? Wait a bit, though,
what are we slogging away for day and night now?”
“Building Communism, I suppose,” said Zemelya, beaming.
“You don’t say? So tha-at’s what it is!” the senior vacuum man said in an
idiotic nasal whine, and shuffled off back to his corner.
Klara wasn’t sure whether they talked like this for their own amusement or
for her benefit, but she didn’t report them.
Her duties were uncomplicated; she and Tamara worked alternate shifts:
from morning till 6:00 p.m. one day, and from after dinner until 11:00 p.m. the
next. The captain was always there in the morning because the brass might
want him in the course of the day; he never turned up in the evening, since he
did not aspire to promotion. The girls’ main task was to act as “duty officers,”
or, in other words, to keep an eye on the prisoners. By way of training, their
boss also gave them little jobs about which there was no urgency. Klara and
Tamara saw each other for only about two hours a day. Tamara had been
working in the establishment for over a year and was at ease with the
prisoners. Klara in fact suspected that Tamara was on quite intimate terms with
one of them and brought him books, which, however, changed hands when no
one was looking. Apart from this, Tamara went to an English class there in the
institute, in which the pupils were free workers and the teachers (unpaid, of
course, that was the great advantage) were prisoners. Tamara quickly dispelled
Klara’s fears that these people might do something awful.
In the end, Klara started talking to one of the prisoners herself. Not, to be
sure, a political offender but a petty lawbreaker, one of the very few in
Marfino. This was Ivan the glassblower, a superb craftsman, unfortunately for
him. His old aunt used to say that he was a golden workman but a still more
golden drunkard. He used to earn a lot, spend a lot on drink, and, when drunk,
beat his wife and pitch into the neighbors. None of this would have mattered if
his path hadn’t crossed that of the MGB. An important comrade with no badges
of rank summoned him in writing and offered him a job with a salary of three
thousand rubles. Ivan, as it happened, worked in the sort of place where his
basic wage was less but where he could bump it up by piecework. So he forgot
who he was dealing with and asked for four thousand a month. His highly
placed interlocutor offered an extra two hundred, but Ivan dug his heels in. He
was sent packing. The next payday he got drunk and started making a row in the
yard. In the past, the militia had turned a deaf ear to complaints, but this time
they turned up in force and took Ivan in. He was tried the next day, given one
year, and taken straight from the court to see the same important person without
badges of rank, who explained that Ivan would be working in the place
previously intended for him, only now they would not be paying him for it. If
these terms did not suit him, he could go and mine coal in the Arctic Circle.
Now Ivan sat in Marfino blowing cathode-ray tubes of all shapes and sizes.
His year was nearly over, but his conviction remained on his record; and to
avoid being sent away from Moscow, he was begging the authorities to keep
him on in the same job as a free worker, at fifteen hundred rubles if they liked.
Nobody else in the sharashka would have found such an artless tale with
such a happy ending at all interesting; there were people in the sharashka who
had spent fifty days in the death cell, and there were people who had known
the pope and Albert Einstein personally. But Klara was shaken by it. It showed
that, as Ivan said, “they can do just what they like.”
She was distrustful of the political prisoners, and her cautiously official
manner kept them at a distance. But even the glassblower’s story was enough
to awaken in her mind the suspicion that among these blue-overalled people
others, too, might be completely innocent. If that was so, could her own father
have condemned an innocent man in his time?
But once again there was no one to whom she could put this question, either
in the family or at work. Her friendship with Innokenty, and that outing of
theirs, had led to nothing, probably because he and Nara had gone abroad
again soon afterward.
However, in the course of the year, Klara did at last make a friend, Ernst
Golovanov. It wasn’t at work that she met him. He was a literary critic, and
Dinera brought him home one day. He wasn’t much of a beau. Scarcely taller
than Klara (and standing by himself he looked shorter), he had a rectangular
forehead and a rectangular head on a rectangular trunk. He was only a little
older than Klara, but he looked middle-aged; he had a paunch and had
obviously never gone in for sports. (To tell the truth, the name in his passport
was Saunkin, and Golovanov was a pseudonym.) But he was a well-read,
intellectually mature, and interesting man and already a candidate member of
the Writers Union.
They had gone to the Maly Theater together. The play was Vassa Zheleznova.
It was a dismal affair. The theater was less than half full, which may have been
why the actors seemed half dead. They came on looking bored, like clerks
arriving at the office, and cheered up only when it was time to leave. It was
almost humiliating to perform to such a poor house; the makeup and the
characters became a silly joke unworthy of adults. At any moment somebody,
speaking quietly as though in his own sitting room, might break the silence of
the audience and say, “Why don’t you good people stop this tomfoolery?” and
the play would collapse in ruins. The humiliation of the actors was contagious.
The whole audience felt as though they were taking part in some deed of shame
and were too embarrassed to look at each other. It was just as quiet during the
intermissions. Couples exchanged whispered remarks and walked noiselessly
about the foyer.
Klara and Ernst were among those who trod this measure in the first
intermission. Ernst stood up for Gorky, indignantly declaring that the
performance was an insult to him, abusing People’s Artist Zharov as—on this
occasion at least—a shameless ham and, more daring still, condemning the
bureaucratic inertia of the Ministry of Culture, which was sapping the vitality
of the Soviet theater, with its marvelous tradition of realism and undermining
the theatergoer’s confidence in it. Ernst spoke as he wrote, in precise and
well-rounded prose, never at a loss for words, and never leaving a sentence
unfinished even when he was excited.
In the second intermission, Klara suggested that they should stay in their
seats.
“I’ll tell you why I’m sick of seeing both Ostrovsky and Gorky,” she said.
“It’s because I’m sick of seeing the power of capital and parental oppression
exposed, sick of seeing young girls forced to marry old men. I’m sick and tired
of this war against phantoms. Fifty years, a hundred years on, we’re still
exorcising, still exposing things long vanished. You never see a play about
things that do exist.”
“There’s some truth in what you say.” Ernst looked at Klara curiously and
with a kind smile. He had not been mistaken in her. This girl was nothing much
to look at, but you’d never be bored with her. “What sort of thing do you
mean?” There was nobody in the seats next to them or in the orchestra
immediately below. Lowering her voice and trying not to betray any important
state secret or the secret of her own sympathy for those people, she told Ernst
that she worked with prisoners who had been represented as running dogs of
imperialism, but that when she had got to know them better, they had turned out
to be . . . such and such. The question that tormented her . . . maybe Ernst could
tell her . . . could there, did he think, be innocent people among them?
Ernst heard her out and answered unhesitatingly, as though he had thought it
over before. “There are, of course. That’s inevitable, with any penal system.”
Klara didn’t want to think about systems. She was in a hurry to append the
glassblower’s conclusion. “But Ernst! That’s as good as saying ‘they can do
what they want to.’ That is horrible!”
Her strong tennis player’s hand closed into a fist on the red velvet of the
barrier in front of them. Golovanov laid his own short-fingered hand flat on the
barrier nearby but did not cover Klara’s hand; he did not take such liberties
uninvited.
“No,” he said, gently but firmly. “It isn’t like that. Who is doing these things?
Who is it who wants to do them? It is history. History does what it wants. You
and I sometimes find it horrible, Klara, but it’s time we were used to the fact
that there exists a law of large numbers. The more material involved in a
historical event, the greater the likelihood of individual incidental errors—
judicial, tactical, ideological, economic, or whatever. We grasp the process
only in its basic and determining outlines, and what matters most is the
conviction that the process itself is necessary and inevitable. Yes, people
sometimes suffer through no fault of their own. What about those killed in
battle? Or those who perished quite senselessly in the Ashkhabad earthquake?
Road victims? As traffic increases, the number of fatal accidents must grow.
The wise philosophy of life is to accept that it is an evolutionary process and
that there will be victims at every stage.”
This explanation seemed to make sense. Klara became thoughtful.
The second bell had rung, and the audience reassembled.
In the third act, Roek, playing Vassa’s younger daughter, suddenly rang true—
rang loud and clear—and bade fair to drag the whole play out of the abyss.
KLARADID NOTREALIZE HERSELF that what concerned her was not just any
innocent man, wherever he might be, someone, say, who might already have
rotted away beyond the Arctic Circle in accordance with the Law of Big
Numbers, but this youngest vacuum man with the blue eyes and the dark golden
complexion, hardly more than a boy in spite of his twenty-three years.
Whenever he saw Klara and ever since their first meeting, the look of joyous
adoration had never left his eyes, and it always excited and confused her. She
could not know what allowances had to be made for Rostislav’s two years in a
camp, where he had never seen a woman. All she knew was that for the first
time in her life she felt herself an object of enraptured admiration.
Admiration of Klara did not, however, dominate his thoughts exclusively.
Confined as he was, spending almost his whole day under electric light in a
dim laboratory, the young man somehow lived a full, indeed, a hectic life;
when he was not busy on some contrivance that was not for the bosses’ eyes or
surreptitiously studying English in working hours, he would be calling up
friends in the other laboratories and dashing off to socialize in the hallways.
His movements were always impetuous, and at any given moment he seemed to
be in the grip of something passionately interesting. Admiring Klara was one
of his passionately interesting occupations.
As busy as he was, he never neglected his appearance; there was always
something immaculately white to be seen beneath the gaudy tie tucked into his
overalls. (Klara did not know that this was the famous “dickey,” Rostislav’s
invention, one-sixteenth of a prison-issue sheet.)
The young people whom Klara met outside (Ernst Golovanov in particular)
were already on their way up in the world, and in everything they did or said
—in their dress, their deportment, their conversation—they were careful not to
let themselves down. In Rostislav’s company Klara felt that a weight was
lifted from her, that she, too, wanted to behave mischievously. She studied him
discreetly, and her sympathy for him grew. She did not believe for a moment
that he, of all people, and the good-natured Zemelya were among those running
dogs of imperialism against whom Major Shikin had warned her. She was
eager to discover what crime Rostislav in particular had been punished for and
whether he had a long sentence to serve. (That he was unmarried she could see
for herself.) She hesitated to ask him directly, imagining that such questions
would be traumatic because they would resurrect his repugnant past, which he
needed to shake off in order to rehabilitate himself.
Another two months or so went by. Klara was by now at home with them all,
and they often discussed in her presence all sorts of idle topics that had nothing
to do with their work. Rostislav made a habit of waiting until she was alone in
the lab, when the prisoners on the evening shift went to dinner, and looking in
to collect something left behind or to study a bit while it was quiet.
During these evening visits Klara forgot all the operations officer’s
warnings. . . .
The night before, impetuous words had burst from them, sweeping away the
pathetic barriers that divide people, as floodwater breaks a dam.
The young man had no hideous past to live down. There was nothing to
discover, except that he had been wantonly robbed of his youth and that he had
an eager appetite to know and to experience all that he had missed.
She learned that he had lived with his mother in a village outside Moscow on
a canal-side. He had just left school when some Americans from the embassy
rented a country home in the village. Ruska and two of his friends were curious
(and rash) enough to go fishing with the Americans twice. They thought that
they had gotten away with it, and Ruska was admitted to Moscow University.
But that September he was arrested on his way there, quietly, so that his mother
did not know for some time where he had gone. (The Ministry of State
Security, apparently, always tried to arrange things so that the person arrested
would not have time to hide anything and his family and friends could not
receive any cryptic message or signal.) They put him in the Lubyanka. (It was
there, in Marfino, that Klara first heard of the prison with that name.) The
interrogators tried to make Rostislav tell them what assignment American
intelligence had given him and to what secret address he was supposed to
report. He was, in his own words, still just a silly kid; he couldn’t understand
what they were getting at, and he cried all the time. Suddenly a miracle
occurred; no one is ever released from the Lubyanka scot-free, but Ruska was.
That was in 1945. And that was as far as he had gotten last night.
The unfinished story had kept Klara in a state of suspense all night. This
afternoon, ignoring all the rules of vigilance, not to mention the limits set by
decorum, she had boldly sat down with Rostislav by his quietly humming
pump, and they had resumed their conversation.
When the dinner break came, they were like children, taking alternate bites
from the same big apple. It seemed strange to them that in all those months they
had never really talked before. They had so much to say and so little time.
When he impatiently interrupted her, he would touch her hands, and she did not
object. But when the others had all left the room, sitting shoulder to shoulder
with hands touching suddenly took on a new meaning. Klara saw those
yearning blue eyes looking straight into her own, and Rostislav’s voice faltered
as he spoke.
“Klara! Who knows whether we will ever sit together like this again? For
me this is a miracle. I adore you.” (By now he was holding and caressing her
hand.) “I may have to spend my whole ruined life in one prison or another.
Make me happy; give me a moment that I can cherish even in solitary
confinement! Let me kiss you!”
Klara felt like a goddess descending into a dungeon where a prisoner lay in
chains. Rostislav drew her toward him and pressed his lips to hers in a violent
kiss, the kiss of a prisoner for whom restraint had become torture. And she
responded. . . .
After a time she freed herself and turned away. She was shaken, and her head
was spinning.
“Please go away,” she begged him.
Rostislav rose and stood before her uncertainly.
“Please leave me alone for now,” Klara insisted.
He hesitated. Then he obeyed. He turned around in the doorway, looked at
her piteously, imploringly, then almost lurched out of the room.
They all came back from the dinner break shortly afterward.
Klara dared not raise her eyes to look at Ruska or anyone else. That burning
sensation. Was it shame? Not just shame. Happiness, then? If so, a troubled
happiness.
She heard people saying that the prisoners were to be allowed a New Year’s
party.
She sat still for three hours, only her fingers moving as she braided a little
basket for the tree from brightly colored plastic flexible cord.
By now Ivan the glassblower had returned from seeing his wife, and he blew
two funny glass imps, armed with what might be rifles, then fashioned a cage
from glass rods and hung inside it a bright moon, also of glass, which tinkled
mournfully as it swung on its silver thread.