Chapter-20-A-Study-of-a-Great-Life

TWO-THIRDS OF ACENTURY. The beginnings lost in a blue haze. And who then
could have imagined in his wildest dreams how it would end? Looking
backward, it was difficult to resurrect and believe in the beginning.
He had been born to a life without hope. An illegitimate son, registered in the
name of a drunken, penniless cobbler. An illiterate mother. Grubby little Soso
forever splashing about in the puddles near Queen Tamara’s hill. How could
such a child ever escape from the depths of degradation, let alone become
ruler of the world?
But the author of his existence had pulled strings; and, although he did not
belong to a priestly family, the boy had been admitted, contrary to the
established practice of the church, first to a church school, then, still more
remarkably, to a seminary. From the highest point of the blackened iconostasis,
the God of Sabaoth sternly summoned the novice prostrate on the cold stone
flags. Oh, how zealously the boy had entered into the service of his God! How
unreservedly he surrendered himself! In his six years of schooling he crammed
into himself as best he could the Old and New Testaments, the Lives of the
Saints, and church history, and he was a punctilious altar boy.
Yes, there it was in his Biography, a snapshot of Dzhugashvili wearing a
gray cassock with a round, buttoned collar before he was expelled. There was
no color in his boyishly oval face; he looked exhausted by prayer. His hair,
grown long in readiness for his ordination, was carefully parted, humbly
smeared with oil from the icon lamps, and combed down right over his ears.
Only his eyes and his tense brows hinted that here was a novice who might
someday be an archbishop.
But God had disappointed him. Time had left behind the odious, sleepy little
town where the Medzhuda and the Liakhva meander among rounded green
hills. In noisy Tiflis clever people had realized long ago that God was a joke.
And the ladder up which Soso was so tenaciously climbing led, he now saw,
not to Heaven but to a pauper’s garret.
He was at a boisterous and bellicose age; he longed for action. Time was
passing, and nothing had been achieved! He had no money to go to university,
obtain a government post, or set up in business. Instead, there was socialism,
which turned no one away, socialism, which was used to seminarians. He felt
no inclination toward any art or science, he lacked the know-how to become an
artisan or a thief, he was not successful enough with women to become the
lover of a rich lady, but Revolution summoned all men, received them with
open arms, and promised them a place.
At his own suggestion his favorite photograph of himself had been inserted at
this point in the book. There he was, almost in profile. He was wearing . . . not
exactly a beard or a mustache or sideburns; he simply hadn’t shaved for quite a
while, and beard, mustache, and sideburns had run together in a picturesque
manly growth. He was all eagerness, all aspiration, but he did not yet know to
what. What a likable young man! A frank, clever, energetic face, not a trace of
the fanatical novice. Free now of the lamp oil, his hair had sprung up and
flopped forward to conceal what was perhaps a rather unsatisfactory feature,
his low, sloping forehead. He was poor; his jacket had been shabby when he
bought it; a cheap checkered scarf was draped around his neck with bohemian
abandon, covering his unhealthily narrow chest in lieu of a shirt. One of many
such young men in Tiflis, surely doomed to tuberculosis.
Whenever Stalin looked at that photograph, his heart filled with pity (for no
heart is altogether incapable of it). How difficult everything had been for him;
the whole world was against that splendid young man, his only shelter a cold
but rent-free closet at the observatory after his expulsion from the seminary.
(He had wanted for safety’s sake to combine the two things, and for four years
had attended Social Democratic study groups while continuing to say his
prayers and recite his catechism, but they had expelled him just the same.)
Eleven years of prayer and genuflection had gone for nothing. . . . All the
more resolutely did he transfer his youthful energies to the Revolution!
But Revolution, too, had proved a disappointment.
What sort of Revolution was it, anyway, in Tiflis? Bigheaded braggarts
playing games in a wine cellar. You could get lost in this anthill of nonentities.
They had no concept of advancement by regular stages or of seniority. It was
just a question of who could outtalk whom. The former seminarian came to
hate those chatterers more than he hated provincial governors or policemen.
(Why be angry with them? They earned their salary honestly and naturally had
to defend themselves, but there was no excuse for these upstarts!) Revolution?
Among Georgian shopkeepers? It would never happen! And now he had cut
himself off from the seminary, lost what should have been his way in life.
The hell with it anyway, this so-called Revolution, all these paupers,
workers who boozed their wages away, sick old women, people cheated of a
few odd kopecks. . . . Why was he supposed to love them and not his young,
clever, handsome, unappreciated self?
It was only in Batum, when he led a couple of hundred people (including the
idly curious) along a street for the first time that Koba (his Revolutionary
nickname) felt the thrill of power. People were following him! After that first
experience he never forgot the taste of it. This was the life that he was made
for, the only sort of life he could understand: You speak, and people have to do
what you say; you show them where to go, and people have to go there. There
is nothing better than this, nothing finer in the world. Riches are nothing in
comparison.
A month later the police bestirred themselves and arrested him. Nobody
feared arrest in those days. It meant very little. You were in custody for two
months, and when you were let out, you were a martyr. Koba behaved
admirably in the common cell and encouraged the others to treat their jailers
with contempt.
But they hung on to him. All his cellmates went and were replaced by others.
He was still inside. What, after all, had he done? No one was punished so
severely for an insignificant demonstration.
A whole year went by! And he was transferred to a dark, damp, one-man cell
in Kutaisi Jail. Here he began to despair. Life was going by, and instead of
rising in the world, he was sinking even lower. The damp gave him a painful
cough. And all this gave him even more reason to hate those professional
loudmouths, fortune’s favorites, it seemed: Why did they get away with
“Revolution” so lightly; why weren’t they kept inside as long?
Then one day a gendarme officer he knew from Batum arrived at Kutaisi Jail.
“Well, Dzhugashvili, have you had time to think? This is only the beginning,
Dzhugashvili. We shall keep you here until you either rot with consumption or
correct your line of conduct. We want to save you and your soul. You were five
minutes away from becoming a priest, Father Iosif! Why did you join that
gang? You don’t belong with them. Tell me that you’re sorry.”
He was indeed sorry, so very sorry! His second spring in jail was ending, his
second dreary summer of jail lay ahead. Why, oh why had he thrown away a
modest position in the church? How rash he had been! The wildest imagination
could not conceive of Revolution in Russia in less than fifty years’ time, when
Iosif would be seventy-three. What good would Revolution be to him then?
But it wasn’t just that. By now Iosif had gotten to know himself, to realize
that he was by nature deliberate and methodical, a lover of order and stability.
But these were the very qualities—order, stability, solidity, consistency—that
sustained the Russian Empire. What was the point of trying to destabilize it?
The officer with the corn-colored mustache paid visit after visit. (Iosif found
his trim gendarme’s uniform with its handsome shoulder boards, neat buttons,
piping, and buckles most attractive.) What I am offering you is after all an
opportunity to serve the state. (Iosif was ready to transfer once and for all to
the service of the state, but he had spoiled his chances at Tiflis and Batum.)
You will receive an allowance from us. To begin with, you will help us by
working among the Revolutionaries. Choose the most extreme faction. Start
playing a leading role in it. We will always handle you carefully. You will
communicate with us in such a way that no shadow of suspicion will fall on
you. But first, so as not to compromise you, we will transport you under guard
to a distant place of exile, and you will leave it immediately—that’s what
everybody does.
Dzhugashvili was not long in deciding. The third wager of his young life was
laid on the secret police!
He was exiled to Irkutsk Province in November. Among other exiles there he
read a letter from a certain Lenin, well known for his newspaper Iskra. Lenin
had isolated himself at the outermost limit of the movement and was now
writing around in quest of supporters. He was obviously the man to join.
Iosif left the dreadful frosts of Irkutsk toward Christmas and was in the sunny
Caucasus before the war with Japan broke out.
From then on he enjoyed a long period of immunity. He met underground
activists, composed leaflets, convened meetings. . . . Others were arrested
(especially those he didn’t like), but he escaped notice and was not on the
wanted list. Nor was he called up for military service.
Then suddenly. . . ! Though nobody was expecting it so soon, no preparations
had been made, nothing had been organized. It was upon them! Crowds
marched through Petersburg bearing political petitions. Grand dukes and other
bigwigs were assassinated, Ivanovo-Voznesensk was on strike, Lodz rebelled,
the battleship Potemkin mutinied, a manifesto was squeezed out of the tsar, in
spite of which machine guns were soon chattering in the Presnya district of
Moscow, and the railways were brought to a standstill.
Koba was stunned, thunderstruck. Could he have made yet another mistake?
Why was he so completely lacking in foresight?
The Okhranka
* had misled him! He was a three-time loser! Give me back my
uncompromised Revolutionary soul! Trapped in a vicious circle! Tumble
Russia into a Revolution, and the day afterward your denunciations will come
tumbling out of the Okhranka archives. But after all the shooting, the uproar, the
hangings, they looked around and the Revolution had vanished!
This was when the Bolsheviks adopted the sound Revolutionary practice of
“expropriation.” Some Armenian moneybags would be sent a letter telling him
where to bring along ten, fifteen, or twenty-five thousand rubles. And the
moneybags would bring the money, to persuade them not to blow up his shop
or kill his children. This was the real thing! This was what genuine
Revolutionaries should be doing! Not wasting time on scholastic argument,
leaflets, demonstrations. . . . This was real Revolutionary activity! The goodygoody
Mensheviks grumbled that robbery and terrorism were incompatible
with Marxism. Oh, how mercilessly Koba ridiculed them, hunting them down
like cockroaches—it was for this that Lenin called him “the marvelous
Georgian.” The “ex-es” were robbery, but what else was Revolution? Wasn’t
that robbery? How ridiculous they were, those sanctimonious humbugs! Where
else would you get money for the Party? Where? From the Revolutionaries
themselves? A bird in hand is worth two in the bush.
The “ex-es” were in fact the form of Revolutionary activity that Koba liked
most of all. And no one was as clever as Koba at recruiting uniquely reliable
people like Kamo, who would unquestioningly obey his orders, brandish a
revolver, snatch a sack of gold, and take it to Koba. When they snatched
340,000 rubles from the couriers of a Tiflis bank, that could be seen as a
proletarian Revolution in miniature, and only idiots lived in expectation of the
big one. This was one of the things that the police did not know about Koba,
and the dividing line between police and Revolution remained as before. He
was never short of money.
The Revolution now carried him around on Continental trains and on ships,
showed him islands, canals, and medieval castles. All rather different from a
stinking Kutaisi cell! In Tammerfors, Stockholm, and London, Koba was able
to take a close look at the Bolsheviks and the manic Lenin.
They took good care of him. The more prominent, the better known he
became in the Party, the nearer to home his places of exile were. He would be
banished now not to Baikal but to Solvychegodsk, and for two years, not three.
Between spells of banishment, he was allowed to play at Revolution
unhindered. Finally, after he had walked away three times from exile in Siberia
and the Urals, the implacable and indefatigable rebel was shunted off to
Vologda, of all places, where he lodged in the police chief’s apartment and
could reach Petersburg by train overnight.
But one February evening in 1912, Ordzhonikidze, a junior colleague in the
Baku days, arrived in Vologda from Prague, shook him by his shoulders, and
shouted, “Soso! Soso! You’ve been co-opted to the C.C.”
The moon shone on wreathing frozen mist as the thirty-two-year-old Koba,
wrapped up in his fur coat, paced the yard for hours. He was vacillating yet
again. Member of the Central Committee! Ah, but Malinovsky was both a
member of the Bolshevik Central Committee and a deputy in the state Duma.
Lenin was particularly fond of Malinovsky. So what? That was under the tsar.
After the Revolution anyone in the C.C. today was sure to be a minister. No
Revolution could be expected, of course, in his lifetime. But even without
Revolution a Central Committee member had some sort of power. Whereas his
prospects in the employment of the secret police were . . . what? He would
always be an insignificant snooper. Instead of a member of the Central
Committee! No, he must part company with the security police. Azef’s hideous
fate haunted him day and night.
The following morning they took the train to Petersburg. Where they were
promptly arrested. The young and inexperienced Ordzhonikidze was given
three years in the Schlüsselburg Fortress, with banishment to follow. Stalin,
true to form, was merely banished for three years. True, it was to a rather
distant place, the Narym region. This was meant as a warning. But
communications in the Russian Empire were not too bad, and in late summer
Stalin made his way safely back to Petersburg.
He now switched his efforts mainly to Party work. He visited Lenin in
Krakow (no difficult matter even for an “exile”). He organized a printing press
here, a May Day demonstration there, a leaflet campaign somewhere else, and
suddenly, at an evening meeting in the Kalashnikov labor exchange, he was
nabbed. The Okhranka had lost its temper, and this time he was sent packing to
a real place of exile, Kureika, beyond the Arctic Circle. The tsar’s government
could dish out ruthless sentences when it wanted to, and he got—horror of
horrors!—four years, four whole years!
Stalin faltered yet again. For what and for whom had he renounced his
comfortable, uneventful life under state patronage and gotten himself banished
to this godforsaken hole? “Member of the C.C.” might tickle the ear of an idiot,
but . . . Several hundred members of assorted parties shared Stalin’s exile, and
when he looked at them, he was horrified. What a loathsome breed these
professional Revolutionaries were—empty show-offs, loudmouths, incapable
of independent action, mentally bankrupt. Stalin, the Caucasian, dreaded the
Arctic Circle less than the company of these flimsy, unstable, irresponsible,
unserious people. To cut himself off from them once and for all—he would
sooner have lived with the bears!—he married a Cheldonian, a mammoth of a
woman with a squeaky voice. Better her tittering and the evil-smelling fat she
cooked in than all those assemblies, debates, altercations, comrades’ courts.
. . . Stalin let it be known that he wanted nothing to do with these people, broke
off relations with them—and with the Revolution, too. Enough was enough. At
thirty-five he was not too old to start living honestly. There comes a time when
you must stop drifting before the wind, with your empty pockets like billowing
sails. He despised himself for wasting so many years with those pathetic
hacks.
From then on he was a man apart, steering clear of Bolsheviks and anarchists
alike. He had no thought now of escaping; his intention was to serve out his
sentence like an honest exile. Besides, war had broken out, and only there in
exile could he be sure of surviving. He stayed put with his Cheldonian woman,
keeping his head down. A son was born to them. The war seemed neverending.
He would have fought tooth and nail for an extra year of exile! Russia
had a tsar too feeble even to hand down a decent sentence!
The war went on and on. And the Police Department, with which he had once
been on such good terms, handed his file card, and his soul with it, to a
recruiting officer who didn’t know the first thing about Social Democrats and
their Central Committees and who called up Iosif Dzugashvili, born 1879, no
previous military service, to serve as a private in the Imperial Russian Army.
That was the beginning of the future great marshal’s military career. He had
tried three different careers one after another, and now he would be embarking
on a fourth.
A sleepily gliding sled carried him along the Yenisei to Krasnoyarsk, and on
to the barracks at Achinsk. He was in his thirty-eighth year, and he was . . . a
nothing, a Georgian soldier, shivering in a skimpy greatcoat, cannon fodder for
the front in transit across frozen Siberia. A great life was about to be cut short
around some Belorussian farmstead or some Jewish shtetl.
But before he had learned to roll up a greatcoat or load a rifle (in later years,
as a commissar and then a marshal, he still didn’t know how and would have
been embarrassed to ask), ticker-tape messages from Petrograd caused people
to hug one another in the streets and shout steamily into the frosty air, “Christ is
Risen!” The tsar had abdicated! The empire was no more!
How had it happened? Who had brought it about? They had given up hope,
stopped counting on it. “Unknowable, O Lord, are Thy ways!” How true were
these words Iosif remembered from his childhood.
No one could remember when the Russian public had last rejoiced so
unanimously. But, until another telegram arrived, Stalin could not join in the
general jubilation. Till then the specter of Azef, hanged by the neck, dangled
importunately over his head.
The news he needed came one day later. The Okhranka’s headquarters had
been sacked and burned. All its documents had been destroyed!
They knew, those Revolutionaries, what to burn first! Stalin felt sure that
there were others like himself in the files, quite a few of them.
(The Okhranka had gone up in flames, but for the rest of his life Stalin was
watchful and suspicious. With his own hands he paged through tens of
thousands of archival pages and pitched whole files into the flames without
examining them. Still, he missed something, and in 1937 it very nearly saw the
light of day. Whenever a member of his own Party was put on trial, Stalin
invariably accused him of having been a police informer: He had learned how
easy it is to fall and found it hard to imagine that others had failed to insure
themselves as he had.)
Stalin later refused to speak of the “great” February Revolution, but he had
forgotten how he himself had rejoiced and sung and winged his way from
Achinsk (there was nothing now to stop him from deserting!) and done foolish
things and handed in at a post office in the backwoods a telegram to Lenin in
Switzerland.
Once in Petrograd, he had immediately agreed with Kamenev that this was it,
all that they had dreamed of in their underground days. The Revolution was
complete, and all they had to do was consolidate its achievement. This was a
time for practical people (especially those who were already members of the
C.C.). They must do all in their power to support the provisional government.
It was all so clear to them until that adventurer, who knew nothing about
Russia, who lacked all-around practical experience, arrived and—spluttering,
slurring, twitching—came out with his “April theses” and created total
confusion! Yet somehow he cast a spell over the Party and dragged it into the
July uprising! This desperate adventure failed, as Stalin had foretold, and the
whole Party almost went under with it. And where did the strutting gamecock
turn up next? He had saved his skin by fleeing to the Gulf of Finland, while the
foulest abuse was heaped upon Bolsheviks back home. Was his liberty more
valuable than the prestige of the Party? Stalin had posed the question candidly
at the Sixth Congress but had not obtained a majority.
Altogether 1917 had been an unpleasant year: too many meetings, eloquent
ranters were carried on the crowd’s shoulders, Trotsky was never off the stage
in the Circus building. Where had they all come from, these nimble-tongued
ninnies, swarming like flies onto honey? He had never seen them in exile,
never seen them when he was carrying out “ex-es”; they had been idling
abroad, and now they had come back to yap their heads off and sneak into the
front row. Whatever the subject under discussion, they hopped onto it as quick
as fleas. They always knew the answer before the question was asked, before
the problem arose. They laughed at Stalin openly, insultingly. True, he steered
clear of their debates, never sat on platforms. For the time being he was
keeping his own counsel. He did not like bandying words, trying to shout an
opponent down, and he was no good at it. This was not how he had imagined
the Revolution. Occupying important posts, doing a serious job—that was what
he had looked forward to.
They laughed at him, all those pointy-beards, but why was it on Stalin that
they loaded all the heaviest and most thankless tasks? They laughed at him, but
why did all the others in Kschessinskaya’s former palace suddenly develop
stomachaches and send Stalin to Petropavlovka when the sailors had to be
persuaded to surrender the fortress to Kerensky without a fight and themselves
withdraw to Kronstadt? Why? Because the sailors would have stoned, say,
Grishka Zinoviev. Because you had to know how to talk to the Russian people.
The October Revolution had been another reckless venture, but it had come
off. Good. Full marks to Lenin there. Nobody knew what would follow, but for
the time being, good. Commissariat of Nationalities? Very well, then, I don’t
mind. Draw up a constitution? Why not? Stalin was sizing up the situation.
Surprisingly, for a year the Revolution looked like a complete success.
Nobody would ever have expected it, but there it was. That clown Trotsky
even believed in world Revolution and opposed the Brest-Litovsk peace
treaty. In fact, Lenin, too, believed in it. Pedants! Fantasists! Only an ass would
believe in a European Revolution. They had lived there for years and learned
nothing. Whereas Stalin had traveled across Europe once and understood it
completely. They should thank Heaven that their own Revolution had been a
success. And sit quietly. Pause for thought.
Stalin looked around with a sober and unprejudiced eye. Thought things over.
And saw clearly that these phrasemongers would ruin this great Revolution.
Only he, Stalin, could steer it in the right direction. In all honesty, in all
conscience, he was the only real leader among them. He compared himself
dispassionately with those poseurs, those mountebanks, and he saw clearly his
own essential superiority, their instability, his own staying power. What set
him apart from all the others was his understanding of people. He understood
them at the point where they touched ground, at the base, understood that part
of them without which they would not stand on their feet and remain standing:
Everything higher than that—all the pretenses, all the boasts—was
“superstructure” and of no importance.
Lenin, of course, could soar like an eagle. He could amaze you: turn right
around overnight and say, “Let the peasants have the land!” (we can always
change our minds later), think up the Brest-Litovsk treaty in a single day (even
a Georgian, let alone a Russian, suffered when he saw half of Russia handed
over to the Germans, but Lenin felt nothing!). As for the New Economic Policy,
it went without saying, that was the neatest trick of the lot; nobody need be
ashamed to learn from such maneuvers. Lenin’s greatest gift, the most
remarkable thing about him, was his ability to hold the real power very tightly
in his own two hands. Slogans changed, the subjects of debate changed, allies
and opponents changed, but all power remained in his hands and his hands
alone!
But the man could not really be relied on. He was storing up a lot of grief for
himself with his economic policy; he was bound to trip himself up with it.
Stalin accurately sensed Lenin’s volatility, his reckless impatience, and worst
of all his poor understanding, or rather total lack of understanding, of people.
(He had tested it on himself: Whichever side of himself he chose to show was
the only one that Lenin saw.) The man was no good at infighting in the dark—in
other words, real politics. Turukhan (66˚ latitude) was a tougher place than
Shushenskoye (54˚), and Stalin felt himself that much tougher than Lenin.
Anyway, what experience of life had this bookworm theoretician ever
acquired? Lowly birth, humiliations, poverty, actual hunger, had not been his
lot: He had been a landowner, though a pretty small one. He had been a model
exile and never once run away! He had never seen the inside of a real prison;
indeed, he had seen nothing of the real Russia. He had idled away fourteen
years in emigration. Stalin had read less than half of his writings, not expecting
to learn a great deal from him. (He did, of course, sometimes produce
remarkably apt definitions: “What is dictatorship? Unlimited government,
unrestrained by laws.” Stalin had written “Good!” in the margin.) If Lenin had
had a sound, sober understanding, he would have made Stalin his closest
associate from the start; he would have said, “Help me! I understand politics, I
know about social classes, but real live people I don’t understand!” But the
best thing he could think of was to pack Stalin off to some far corner of Russia,
where he was put in charge of grain requisitioning. Stalin was the man he
needed most in Moscow, so he sent him to Tsaritsyn.
Lenin arranged things so that he sat in the Kremlin throughout the Civil War.
While Stalin’s lot for three whole years was that of a nomad, scouring the
whole country, shaken to bits on horseback or in an unsprung cart, frozen half
the time, trying to thaw out by a campfire. Stalin, of course, admired himself in
those years: He was a sort of young general without formal rank, elegant and
smart, wearing a leather cap with a star, a cavalry officer’s double-breasted
coat of fine cloth, unbuttoned, and soft leather riding boots, made to order. The
clever young face was clean-shaven except for the flowing mustache. No
woman could resist him (and his third wife was a beauty).
Of course, he never held a saber, never got in the way of bullets; he was too
valuable to the Revolution. He was not like that muzhik Budenny. Whenever
you arrived somewhere new—Tsaritsyn, Perm, or Petrograd—you would keep
quiet for a while, then ask a few questions, stroke your mustache, write “to be
shot” on a list or two, and people would soon begin to show you great respect.
Besides, if the truth be told, he had shown himself to be a great soldier and
the architect of victories.
The whole gang who had scrambled to the top and crowded around Lenin,
struggling for power, all thought themselves very clever, very subtle, very
complex. Their complexity in fact was what they particularly boasted about.
Where twice two clearly made four, they would shriek in a chorus that you
were zero point one two short. The worst of the lot, the foulest of them all, was
Trotsky. Stalin had simply never met such a loathsome person in all his life,
with his insane conceit, his oratorical pretensions. And he never would argue
honestly; there was never a straight yes or no; it always had to be both yes and
no, or neither yes nor no. “Neither peace nor war”—what rational human being
could make sense of that? And his arrogance? Rolling around like the tsar
himself in a sitting room on wheels. What sort of Supreme Commander could
he make, with no strategic flair at all?
This Trotsky’s behavior so galled and annoyed him that Stalin at first lost
control and broke rule no. 1 for all politicians: Never let a man see that you
are his enemy; never let your irritation show. Stalin, instead, was openly
insubordinate, abused Trotsky in letters and in conversation, and missed no
opportunity to complain about him to Lenin. As soon as he heard about
Trotsky’s opinion or decision on any matter whatsoever, he would immediately
put forward reasons for doing just the opposite. But that was no way to win.
Trotsky bowled him over like a ninepin. Trotsky chased him out of Tsaritsyn
and out of the Ukraine. And on one occasion Stalin was taught the harsh lesson
that not all means of struggle are good, that some holds are barred. At a
Politburo meeting he and Zinoviev joined in complaining about Trotsky’s
unauthorized executions. Whereupon Lenin took several blank sheets of paper,
signed at the bottom of each page with the words “approved in advance,” and
in their presence handed these to Trotsky to fill in when he pleased.
He learned his lesson! He was ashamed! What had he been complaining
about? Lenin was right, and so, just for once, was Trotsky: If you couldn’t
shoot people without trial, you would never be able to make history at all.
We are all human, and our senses are quicker to prompt us than our reason.
Every man gives off a scent, and that scent tells you how to act before your
head does. Stalin, of course, had made a mistake in openly opposing Trotsky
too soon (it was a mistake he never made again). But he sensed correctly that
he should stand up to Lenin. His reason would have told him to truckle to
Lenin, always to say, “Oh, how right you are! I’m with you there!” But Stalin’s
unerring instinct found a very different way: to speak to Lenin as roughly as he
could, to resist as stubbornly as a Georgian donkey. I’m an uneducated man, a
rough diamond, a bit of a savage; you’ll have to take me as I am or not at all.
He wasn’t just rough, but boorishly insolent. (“I can only stay another two
weeks at the front, and then you’d better give me some leave.” Would Lenin
have forgiven anyone else for such a thing?) This inflexible, intransigent Stalin
it was who won Lenin’s respect. Lenin realized that this “marvelous Georgian”
was a strong personality, that such people were much needed, and that as time
went by, they would be needed more and more. Lenin listened readily to
Trotsky, but he also gave Stalin a hearing. If he curbed Stalin, he reined in
Trotsky, too. The first was to blame for Tsaritsyn, the second for Astrakhan.
“You must learn to cooperate,” he would urge, but he had to accept their
inability to get along. Trotsky came running to complain that although
prohibition was in force throughout the republic, Stalin was drinking his way
through the tsar’s cellar in the Kremlin; what if the soldiers at the front came to
know of it? Stalin turned it into a joke; Lenin laughed; Trotsky stopped pointing
his beard at them and went away empty-handed. When Stalin was removed
from the Ukraine, he was given a second commissariat (Workers’ and Peasants’
Inspectorate) to make up for it.
That was in March 1919. Stalin was into his fortieth year. For anybody else
the WPI would have been a shabby little snooping operation, but under Stalin it
rose to become the most important people’s commissariat! (That was just what
Lenin wanted. He knew Stalin’s firmness, his unswerving sense of purpose, his
incorruptibility.) It was to Stalin that he entrusted the tasks of seeing justice
done in the Republic, of keeping an eye on the morality of Party officials, even
the most important of them. If Stalin understood the nature of his work
correctly and was prepared to devote himself to it body and soul, with no
thought for his health, he could now surreptitiously (but quite legally) gather
incriminating evidence against all responsible officials, dispatch investigators,
collect denunciations, and take charge of the ensuing purges. To do all this, he
must create an apparatus, selecting from all over the country people as selfless,
as unyielding, as himself, and who, like him, were prepared to toil in obscurity
for no visible reward. It was slow, demanding, painstaking work, but Stalin
welcomed it.
It is rightly said that we reach maturity at forty. Only then do we finally
understand how to live and how to behave. Only then did Stalin become aware
of his greatest strength: the power of the unspoken verdict. Your mind is made
up, but the person whose head depends on your decision must not learn it too
soon. Time enough for that when his head rolls! Another strength was his habit
of disbelieving what others said and attaching no importance to his own
words. Say not what you mean to do (you may not know it until the moment
comes) but what puts the other person at ease. A third rule for the strong man is
never to forgive anyone who betrays you, and if your teeth are in someone’s
throat, never to let go, though the sun rises in the west and portents appear in
the heavens. A fourth rule for the strong man is not to rely on theory. Theory
never helped anyone; you can always produce some sort of theoretical
justification after the event. What you must always keep in mind is what fellow
traveler you need for the present and at which milestone you must part
company.
These rules helped him in due course to regularize the Trotsky situation. With
the help of Zinoviev to begin with, and later that of Kamenev, too. (Cordial
relations were established with both of them.) It became obvious to Stalin that
he need not have worried so much about Trotsky: No need to shove him into
the ditch; he would jump and land in it unassisted. Stalin knew his business and
worked away quietly, unhurriedly selecting cadres, trying people out,
committing every one of them to memory so that he would know who could be
relied on, looking for opportunities to promote and place them. The time came
when, just as he had expected, Trotsky took a tumble, unaided. In the trade
union controversy. His exhibitionist ravings infuriated Lenin—he shows no
respect for the Party!—and Stalin was, conveniently, in a position to replace
Trotsky’s people: Krestinsky with Zinoviev, Preobrazhensky with Molotov,
Serebryakov with Yaroslavsky. Voroshilov and Ordzhonikidze, Stalin’s own
men, were hoisted into the Central Committee. The illustrious Commander in
Chief was now unsteady on his heron’s legs! And Lenin realized that Stalin
was the unshakable defender of Party unity and that he asked for nothing,
wanted nothing for himself. What won over all the leading comrades was the
nice, guileless Georgian’s refusal to join in the scramble for the platform, to
court popularity, as all the others did. He never flaunted his knowledge of
Marx; he worked away modestly, handpicking party apparatchiks, a solitary
comrade, true as steel, honest as the day was long, self-denying, diligent, a
little undereducated, perhaps, a bit crude, rather limited. . . . So when Lenin
became ill, they elected Stalin secretary-general, rather as Mikhail Romanov
was elected tsar.
That was in May 1922. Anybody else would have been satisfied with that
much and sat silently rejoicing. Not Stalin, though. Anybody else might have
set about reading Das Kapital and making excerpts. Stalin, though, sniffed the
air and knew that it was now or never: The conquests of the Revolution were
in danger; there was not a minute to lose. Lenin could not hang on to power
and, left to himself, would not transfer it to safe hands. Lenin’s health was
precarious, and maybe that was for the best. If he survived as leader, there was
no knowing what might happen; nothing was certain. Erratic, bad-tempered,
and now sick into the bargain, he was more irritating every day; he was simply
a hindrance. In everybody’s way! He could abuse a man, make him feel small,
dismiss him from an elected post for no reason at all.
Stalin’s first idea was to dispatch Lenin to, say, the Caucasus for a rest cure.
The air was good; there were out-of-the-way places which were without phone
connections to Moscow and to which telegrams traveled slowly. A place like
that, with no official business to be done, would steady his nerves. A tried and
trusted comrade, the former expropriator (bank-raider Kamo), could be on
hand to keep an eye on his health. Lenin was willing, and arrangements were
discussed with Tiflis, but there were inexplicable delays. In the meantime,
Kamo was run over and killed. (He had been talking too much about the “exes.”)
Whereupon Stalin, concerned for his leader’s life, raised the question with
the Commissariat of Health and the professor of surgery: The bullet fired by
Fanny Kaplan had never been extracted; it was poisoning Lenin’s organism.
Should he not have another operation for its removal? The doctors were
persuaded. They said as one man that it was necessary, and Lenin consented.
But once again there were delays. And all that happened was that Lenin went
off to Gorky.
“We must be firm with Lenin,” Stalin wrote to Kamenev. Kamenev and
Zinoviev, his best friends at the time, agreed completely. Firm about his
treatment, firm about his routine, firm about excluding him from official
business, for the sake of his precious life. And of course firm about keeping
him away from Trotsky. Krupskaya, too, must be curbed; she was only an
ordinary Party member. Stalin was made officially “responsible for the health
of Comrade Lenin,” and he did not consider it beneath him to deal directly
with the doctors in charge, and even with nurses, to give them instructions on
the most beneficial regimen for Lenin, which was to say no to him and keep
saying no even if he got upset. In political matters the prescription was the
same: Lenin doesn’t like the draft law on the Red Army—right, push it through;
Lenin doesn’t like what we’re doing about the Central Executive Committee—
right, push it through. Don’t give way at any price; remember he’s a sick man;
he can’t possibly know best. If he insists on something being done urgently,
take your time over it, postpone it. The secretary-general can even answer
back, very rudely—it just means he’s a straight shooter; he can’t force himself
to behave unnaturally, to do violence to his own character.
Still, for all Stalin’s exertions, Lenin made a slow recovery: His illness
dragged on till autumn, when the argument about the Central Executive
Committee grew heated, and dear Ilyich was up and about only briefly. He left
his bed only to resurrect in December 1922 his entente cordiale with Trotsky,
and against Stalin, of course. If that was all he had gotten up for, he had better
go back to bed. Medical surveillance now became stricter. He was forbidden
to read or write or be told anything about official business; he must just eat his
gruel. But dear Ilyich took it into his head to write his political testament,
behind the secretary-general’s back, another move against Stalin. He dictated
for five minutes a day, which was all he was allowed, all Stalin allowed him.
But Stalin grinned into his mustache as the stenographer came clippety-clop
along the corridor in her high heels, bringing him the obligatory copy. Next
Krupskaya had to be pulled up sharply, as she deserved, whereupon dear Ilyich
got overheated and suffered his third stroke! All Stalin’s efforts had failed to
save his life.
He had chosen a good time to die. Trotsky, as luck would have it, was in the
Caucasus, and Stalin gave him the wrong date for the funeral, because there
was no need for him to attend: It was much more fitting for the secretarygeneral
to pronounce the oath of loyalty (and very important that he should).
But Lenin had left that will. It could set comrade against comrade; it might be
misunderstood. Some people even wanted to replace the secretary-general. So
Stalin drew even closer to Zinoviev, assuring him that he was now the obvious
leader of the Party, and urging him as future leader to present the Central
Committee’s report to the Thirteenth Congress, while Stalin retained his
humble post of secretary-general, which was all he wanted. So Zinoviev
lorded it on the Congress platform, delivered his report and . . . and that was
all. (He could hardly be elected to the nonexistent post of “leader of the
Party.”) But in return for this privilege, he persuaded the Central Committee
that Lenin’s testament would not even be read out at the Congress and that
Stalin would not be dismissed, since he had now mended his ways.
The members of the Politburo were all of one mind at the time, all against
Trotsky. They made a good job of rejecting his proposals and removing his
supporters from their posts. Any other secretary-general might have been
satisfied. But Stalin the indefatigable, the unblinking, knew that it was far too
soon to relax.
Would it be a good thing if Kamenev took Lenin’s place as chairman of the
Council of People’s Commissars? (When Stalin and Kamenev had visited the
sick man together, reports in Pravda had made it appear that Stalin had gone
alone. Just in case. He foresaw that Kamenev, too, was not eternal.) Maybe
Rykov would be better? Well, Kamenev himself agreed, and so did Zinoviev,
such was the harmony among them all!
But before long a great blow was struck at this friendship. It transpired that
Zinoviev and Kamenev were humbugs and double-dealers: They were intent
only on power; they did not cherish Lenin’s ideas. They had to be cut down to
size. They became the “new opposition” (and the garrulous Krupskaya found
herself in their company), while Trotsky, after all the punishment he had taken,
held his peace for the time being. The situation thus created was a very
favorable one. The dawn of Stalin’s friendship with the amiable Bukharin, the
Party’s leading theorist, conveniently supervened at this point. Dear little
Bukharin did the speechmaking: Dear little Bukharin provided the theoretical
foundations and justifications (the other lot called for “an offensive against the
kulak,” so our slogan was “Alliance Between Town and Country”). Stalin
himself was not the least bit ambitious for fame, for authority; he just looked
after the voting and made sure that the right man was in the right place. A lot of
the right comrades were already in the posts where they were needed, and
voting correctly. Zinoviev was dismissed from the Communist Internationale;
Leningrad was taken away from the opposition.
You would have thought that they would have resigned themselves to the
situation, but no: They now joined forces with Trotsky, and that poseur had one
last inspiration, the slogan “Industrialization.” So Stalin and dear little
Bukharin came out with “Party unity!” For unity’s sake all must knuckle under!
Trotsky was banished; Zinoviev and Kamenev were gagged.
Another great help was the “Lenin draft”: After that, the majority of the Party
consisted of people untainted with the vices of the intelligentsia,
uncontaminated by the squabbles which went on in the underground and in
emigration, people to whom the former importance of Party leaders meant
nothing and their current image everything. Sound people, dedicated people
were rising from the depths of the Party to occupy important posts. Stalin had
never doubted that he would find such people and that it was they who would
save the conquests of the Revolution. But fate had another surprise in store:
Bukharin, Tomsky, and Rykov also proved to be two-faced. They did not stand
up for the unity of the Party! And Bukharin proved to be not the no. 1 theorist
but the no. 1 muddlehead. His crafty slogan “Alliance Between Town and
Country” had a hidden significance: It hinted at the restoration of the old order,
capitulation to the kulak, the abandonment of industrialization!
Valid slogans were finally discovered. Only Stalin had been capable of
formulating them: “Attack the Kulak and Force the Pace of Industrialization!”
And of course “For Party Unity.”
It was the turn of this vile rightist gang to be swept out of the leadership.
Bukharin, flattering himself, had once quoted some sage’s dictum that
“inferior minds make better administrators.” Wide of the mark, Nikolai
Ivanovich, you and your sage: sound minds, it should be, not inferior minds.
Your own mental capacity you demonstrated at your trials. Stalin had sat in a
closed-off section of the gallery, watching them through a wire screen and
smiling to himself. What orators they once were! How forceful they had once
seemed! That they should come to this! Pathetic washouts!
His understanding of human nature and his sober good sense had always been
Stalin’s strengths. He understood those he saw with his own eyes. But he also
understood people whom he had not seen for himself. When things were
difficult in 1931–32 and the country was without food and clothing, one good
push from outside might have toppled us, or so it seemed. The Party gave the
command: Sound the alarm; there is a danger of intervention! But Stalin
himself had never believed a word of it, because he had just as clear a picture
of those other, Western windbags.
There was no way of measuring what it had cost, in health and strength and
stamina, to cleanse the Party and the country of their enemies, to cleanse
Leninism, that infallible doctrine to which Stalin had never been false: He was
doing precisely what Lenin had envisaged, only somewhat less drastically and
without unnecessary fuss.
So much effort! And yet things were never quiet; there was never a time
when no one stood in the way. One minute it would be Tukhachevsky popping
up to say that but for Stalin he would have taken Warsaw. Then Frunze stepped
out of line, and the censor nodded. Or some trashy yarn pictured Stalin as a
dead man upright on a mountain, and once again those idiots failed to spot it.
Then the Ukraine let the crop rot in the fields; the Kuban opened fire from
sawn-off shotguns. Ivanovo—yes, Ivanovo!—went on strike. . . .
Never once did Stalin lose his self-control. Not after the mistake he had
made with Trotsky. He knew that the mills of history grind slow, but they never
stop turning. No need for a noisy show of indignation; all those who were
jealous of him would go away, die, be trodden into the dung heap. (Sorely
wounded as Stalin was by those writers, he did not seek revenge, not for that;
to do so would not have taught a lesson. He waited for another opportunity;
there would always be an opportunity.)
And sure enough, everyone who in the Civil War had commanded so much as
a battalion, so much as a company in units that were not loyal to Stalin, every
last man of them went, disappeared. Delegates to the Twelfth, Thirteenth,
Fourteenth, Fifteenth, Sixteenth, and Seventeenth Congresses, as though
answering a roll call, departed to a place from which no votes are cast, no
speeches made. Mutinous Leningrad, that dangerous place, was twice purged.
Even friends like Sergo had to be sacrificed. Even such diligent helpers as
Yagoda and Yezhov had to be taken out afterward. And in time the long arm
reached Trotsky and split his skull open.
With no major enemy aboveground, he had surely earned a breathing space?
Finland poisoned it. Marking time on the Karelian Isthmus, he had felt
disgraced in the eyes of Hitler, who was strolling through France with his
walking stick. An indelible blot on the military genius’s reputation! Those
Finns, that hostile nation of double-dyed bourgeois, ought to be deported,
down to the smallest child, to the sands of the Karakum, and he himself would
sit at the phone and keep the tally: so many shot and buried, so many still to go.
Disasters rained on him thick and fast. Hitler tricked him and invaded, a
lovely alliance wrecked out of sheer stupidity! His lips had trembled at the
microphone as he blurted out the words involuntarily, “Brothers and sisters”;
there was no wiping them from the record now. But those brothers and sisters
had fled like sheep; no one had been ready to fight to the death, although they
had been given clear orders to do just that. Why didn’t they stand and fight?
Why had they not immediately stood and fought? . . . It was hurtful.
Then there was the evacuation to Kuibyshev, to the empty air-raid shelters.
He had always been master of the situation; he had never once weakened . . .
except that one time, when he had succumbed to panic, quite needlessly. He
had paced his rooms for a week, had telephoned again and again: Has Moscow
surrendered yet? No, it hasn’t surrendered. It seemed incredible that the
Germans would be halted! But our boys stopped them! Heroes, of course.
Heroes. But many had to be taken out; it would be no victory if the rumor got
around that the Commander in Chief had temporarily left the city. (This
explained the photographs taken of a small parade on November 7.)
Meanwhile, Berlin radio was washing all that dirty linen—the murders of
Lenin, Frunze, Dzherzhinsky, Kuibyshev, Gorky—why stop there! The old
enemy, Churchill, who looked fat enough for a Georgian pork pot roast, flew in
to smoke a couple of cigars in the Kremlin and gloat. The Ukrainians proved
treacherous. (In 1944 he had dreamed of resettling the whole Ukrainian
population in Siberia, but there were too many of them to replace.) There were
other traitors: the Lithuanians, the Estonians, the Tatars, the Cossacks, the
Kalmyks, the Chechens, the Ingush, the Latvians, yes, even the Revolution’s
sturdiest prop, the Latvians. Even his own kin, the Georgians, who were safe
from mobilization—he couldn’t help suspecting that even they would welcome
Hitler. The only ones who remained loyal to their Father were the Russians
and the Jews.
So even the “national question” became a joke at his expense in those trying
years.
But those misfortunes, too, were in the past, thank God. Stalin had recovered
a lot of ground by outwitting Churchill and the holier-than-thou Roosevelt.
Since the twenties he had scored no success to compare with his triumph over
that pair of fools. Answering their letters or returning to his quarters after a
meeting at Yalta, he couldn’t help laughing at them. These statesmen, who
thought themselves so clever, were more stupid than babes in arms. They
would keep asking what things would be like after the war. Well, just send us
your planes, send us your canned food, and when the time comes, we’ll see.
Toss them a word, the idlest passing thought, and they would jump for joy and
rush to get it down on paper. Feign an excess of loving kindness, and they
would be twice as soft. He had got from them—free, gratis, for nothing—
Poland, Saxony, Thuringia, the Vlasovites, the Krasnovites, the Kurile Islands,
Sakhalin, Port Arthur, half of Korea. He had run rings around them on the
Danube and in the Balkans. The “smallholders’ ” leaders triumphed in the
elections and went straight to jail. Mikolajczyk was quickly toppled; Beneš’s
heart gave out, as did Jan Masaryk’s; Cardinal Mindszenty confessed to his
misdeeds; Dimitrov was admitted to the Kremlin heart clinic and there
renounced his nonsensical plan for a Balkan federation.
All Soviet citizens returning home after living in Europe were sent to the
camps. All prisoners who had served only one ten-year sentence were sent
back to serve another.
In a word, things seemed to be coming right at last.
But when even the Siberian taiga no longer rustled with hints of an
alternative socialism, the black dragon Tito crept into the open and blocked all
roads ahead.
Stalin, like some legendary hero, was exhausting his strength, hacking away
at the endlessly proliferating heads of the hydra. . . .
HOW COULD HE have let himself be misled? Failed to discern the scorpion
soul of the man! He, the great expert on human psychology! In 1936 they had
Tito by the throat! And they had let him get away! . . . Ay . . . ay . . . ay . . . ay
. . . ay!
Stalin groaned, swung his legs off the couch, and clutched his balding head.
Vain regrets rankled in his bosom. He had toppled mountains, and he had
tripped over a dunghill.
Iosif had tripped over Josip.
That Kerensky was still living out his days somewhere or other did not
trouble Stalin at all. Nicholas II or Kolchak could return from the grave; Stalin
had no personal animosity toward any of these: They were honest enemies who
did not turn themselves inside out to offer some new, improved socialism of
their own.
A better Socialism! Different from Stalin’s! The pipsqueak! Socialism
without Stalin was no different from fascism!
Not that Tito would get anywhere. Nothing could come of his efforts. As an
old horse-doctor who has slit open any number of bellies, chopped off
innumerable extremities in smoky peasant huts, looks at a lady medic in the
making, come to do her practical work in spotless white, that was how Stalin
looked at Tito.
But Tito made play with long-forgotten slogans from the early days of the
Revolution: “workers’ control,” “land for the peasants.” . . . Soap bubbles to
fascinate idiots.
Lenin’s Collected Works had gone through three revised editions, the works
of the Founding Fathers through two. All those who had raised awkward
questions, all who had been mentioned in obsolete footnotes, all who had
thought of building Socialism differently had long ago fallen asleep. And now,
when it was clear that there was no other way, and that not only Socialism but
Communism would long ago have been constructed
—if it were not for grandees who got too big for their boots, lying reports,
soulless bureaucrats, indifference to the public good, slackness in
organizational and explanatory work among the masses, lack of direction in
the indoctrination of Party members, deliberate delays in construction;
—if it were not for stoppages and absenteeism in industry, the production
of substandard goods, poor planning, reluctance to adopt new technology,
the nonperformance of scientific research institutes, the inadequate training
of young specialists, the reluctance of young people to take jobs out in the
wilds, sabotage by prisoners, loss of grain in the fields, the embezzlements
by bookkeepers, pilfering at depots, thieving stockroom and shop
managers, predatory truckers. . . .
—if it were not for complacent local authorities! excessively tolerant and
venal militiamen! criminal misuse of the housing stock! brazen blackmarketing!
greedy housewives! spoiled children! trolley-car gossips!
nitpicking writers! cock-eyed filmmakers! . . .
When everyone could see that Communism was on the right road and not far
from completion, that cretin Tito and his Talmudist Kardelj reared their ugly
heads and declared that this was not the way to build Communism!
At this point Stalin realized that he was talking aloud, chopping the air; that
his heart was beating furiously, his eyes were clouding, and an unpleasant urge
to twitch had crept into his limbs.
He took a deep breath. Stroked his face and his mustache. Took another deep
breath. He must not let it all get him down.
Ah, yes, he had to see Abakumov. He was about to rise, but his eyes had
cleared, and he spotted a little black-and-red booklet, published in a cheap
mass edition, on his telephone table. He reached for it in pleasurable
anticipation, propped himself up on his cushions, and lay back for a few
minutes more.
It was an advance copy of a work to be published in millions of copies in ten
European languages, Renaud de Jouvenel’s Tito: Traitor in Chief. (It was a
happy circumstance that the author could approach the dispute impartially,
being an objective Frenchman, and what was more, with an aristocratic “de” to
his name.) Stalin had read the book carefully some days earlier (and indeed
had given advice when it was being written), but he was always reluctant to
part with an enjoyable book. It would help so many millions of people to see
through that vainglorious, conceited, cruel, cowardly, loathsome, hypocritical,
villainous tyrant! That vile traitor! That hopeless blockhead! Even the Western
Communists had lost their bearings, didn’t know whom to believe. Even that
old fool André Marty would have to be expelled from the Party for defending
Tito.
He paged through the book. There it was! Let nobody make a hero of Tito:
On two occasions he had wanted, like the coward he was, to surrender to the
Germans, but Arso Jovanovic, his chief of staff, had forced him to go on being
commander in chief! Noble Arso! Murdered. And what about Petricevic?
“Murdered simply because he loved Stalin.” Noble Petricevic! The best
people were always killed by somebody else; it fell to Stalin to finish off the
worst.
It was all there—how Tito was probably a British spy, how vain he was
about his underpants with a royal monogram, his physical ugliness, his
resemblance to Göring, all those diamond rings on his fingers, his chestful of
medals and decorations (what pathetic vanity in a man unendowed with
strategic genius).
An objective, an ideologically sound book. Perhaps Tito was also sexually
inadequate? That ought to be mentioned.
“The Yugoslav Communist Party is in the power of murderers and spies.”
“Tito was only able to take over the leadership because Béla Kun and Traicho
Kostov vouched for him.”
Kostov! Stalin felt a pang. The blood rushed furiously to his head; he
stamped his foot; he kicked out violently, booting Traicho in the face,
bloodying his ugly mug! Stalin’s gray eyelids trembled with satisfaction that
justice had been done.
That damned Kostov! That filthy swine!
Extraordinary how transparent the machinations of these scoundrels became
in retrospect! They were all Trotskyists, but how cleverly they had disguised
themselves! Kun at least had been polished off in ’37, but it was only ten days
since Kostov had stood before a Socialist court and reviled it. Stalin had
managed so many trials successfully, compelled so many enemies to trample on
themselves, and then the Kostov trial had gone disastrously wrong. It was a
disgrace, with the whole world watching! The cunning of the man! To deceive
experienced interrogators, grovel at their feet, then take it all back in open
court! In the presence of foreign journalists! Where was his sense of decency?
His Communist conscience? His proletarian solidarity? Appealing to the
imperialists! All right, so you’re not guilty, but die anyway, for the good of
Communism!
Stalin flung the book away. No, he must not lie down! Battle called.
He rose. Straightened up, but not all the way. Unlocked (and locked behind
him) the other door, not the one at which Poskryobyshev had knocked. His soft
boots shuffled almost silently along a narrow, low-ceilinged, crooked hallway,
also windowless. He went past the secret entrance to his underground
driveway and stopped at a two-way mirror, through which he could see the
waiting room.
He looked. Abakumov was already there. Sitting with a big notebook in his
hand, looking strained, wondering when he would be summoned. Stepping
more firmly, no longer shuffling, Stalin went into his bedroom, which was also
low-ceilinged, cramped, windowless, and air-conditioned. Under the oak
paneling there was armor plating, and only then stone wall.
With a little key that he carried in his waistband, Stalin unlocked the metal
lid of a decanter, poured himself a glass of his favorite cordial, drank it, and
locked the decanter again.
He went over to the mirror. The eyes that had outstared Western premiers
gazed back at him, stern and incorruptible. He looked austere, simple,
soldierly. He rang for his Georgian orderly, to get dressed.
Even to a henchman he would present himself as he would appear in the eyes
of history.
His iron will. . . . His inflexible will.
Never for a moment, never for a moment, must he cease to be . . . a mountain
eagle.
* Okhranka: A slang term for the tsarist secret police, charged with monitoring
the activities of Russian revolutionaries at home and abroad.