Chapter-96-Meat

AS THE RELEGATED PRISONERS were gradually herded into Prison HQ, they
were frisked, and as the search was completed, they were shunted into an
unoccupied room where there stood two bare tables and a crude bench. Major
Myshin in person was present throughout the search, and Lieutenant Colonel
Klimentiev looked in from time to time. Bending down to look into sacks and
suitcases would have overtaxed the corpulent, purple-faced major (and
anyway it was beneath his dignity), but his presence could be relied on to
encourage the screws. They zealously undid all the prisoners’ bundles and
parcels and were particularly quick to pounce on anything written. There was a
standing order that men leaving the special prison had no right to take with
them the merest scrap of paper with anything written, drawn, or printed on it.
So most of the zeks had burned all their letters, destroyed their professional
notebooks, and given away their books in advance.
One prisoner, the engineer Romashov, who had only six more months to
serve (he had chalked up nineteen years and a half), openly carried a fat file
containing clippings, notes, and calculations accumulated over many years on
the construction of hydroelectric power stations. (He was expecting to be sent
to the Krasnoyarsk region and counted on being allowed to practice his
profession there.) Although Engineer Colonel Yakonov had personally
inspected this folder and authorized its release, and although Major Shikin had
already sent it to the ministry, where they had also given their approval,
Romashov’s foresight and unremitting efforts over many months went for
nothing: Major Myshin now announced that he knew nothing about this file and
impounded it. It was seized and carried away, and Engineer Romashov’s eyes,
which had gotten used to everything, followed it unseeingly. In his time, he had
survived a death sentence, transportation in a cattle wagon from Moscow to
Sovgavan, and a broken shin down a pit at Kolyma—he had let a coal tub run
over his leg so that he could rest up in the hospital and escape certain death as
a general laborer in Arctic conditions. So the destruction of ten years’ work
was no reason for shedding tears.
Another prisoner, the small, bald-headed designer Syomushkin, who had put
so much effort into darning his socks on Sunday, was, by contrast, a raw
recruit. He had been inside barely two years, in prison, then at Marfino, and
was now terrified at the thought of a labor camp. But scared and miserable as
he was, he tried to hang on to a small volume of Lermontov that was a sacred
object to him and his wife. He implored Major Myshin to return the little
volume, wringing his hands—strange behavior in a grown man, which the oldline
zeks found offensive. He was prevented from bursting into the lieutenant
colonel’s office but suddenly, with unexpected strength, snatched the book from
the godfather (who recoiled toward the door in a fright), wrenched off the
tooled green covers, flung them away, and began tearing the pages into strips,
weeping convulsively, screaming—“Here then! Gobble it up! Gorge
yourselves!”—and scattering what was left of Lermontov around the room.
The search continued.
When they emerged, the prisoners scarcely recognized one another. As
ordered, they had made one pile of their blue overalls, another of their prisonissue
underwear with the official stamp, a third of their overcoats, if these
were not too threadbare, so that they were all now wearing either their own
old clothes or a substitute provided for them. Their years of work for the
institute had not earned them enough to buy clothes. Not because the prison
authorities were spiteful or miserly. They were answerable to the bookkeepers
—“the watchful eye of the government.” So, in the depths of winter, some were
left without warm underwear and had pulled on short pants and mesh
undershirts that had lain moldering in their knapsacks in the stockrooms, as
unlaundered as they had been on the day of the prisoner’s arrival from some
camp. Some were shod in clumsy prison-camp boots (if a man had camp boots
in his sack, his “civvy” half boots with galoshes were confiscated), others now
had boots with cloth legs attached to leather soles, and the lucky ones had felt
boots.
Felt boots! The convict. That most desolate of earth’s creatures—with less
inkling of his future than a frog, a mole, or a field mouse—has no defense
against fate’s perversities. In the warmest and deepest of holes, the convict
cannot rest assured that once night comes, he will be safe from the horrors of
winter, that an arm with a blue-cuffed sleeve will not seize him and drag him
off to the North Pole.
Woe, then, to feet not shod in felt boots! Two frosted icicles are what he will
set down on Kolyma as he emerges from the back of a truck. A zek without felt
boots of his own will make himself scarce all through the winter, lie,
dissemble, put up with insults from the lowest of the low, or himself bully
others—anything to avoid transportation in winter. But the zek wearing felt
boots of his own is dauntless! He looks authority defiantly in the eye and
accepts his marching orders with a stoical smile.
It was thawing outside, but Khorobrov, Nerzhin, and others with felt boots
thrust their feet into them—partly to lighten their burden but mainly to feel that
reassuring warmth all the way up their legs—and strutted around the empty
room. This, although for the present they were going no farther than Butyrki
Prison, where it was not the least bit colder than in the institute. Fearless
Gerasimovich was the only one with no clothes of his own. The stockroom
man had given him a “previously used” prison-issue jacket too large and loose
to fasten around him and with long, dangling sleeves, together with a pair of
blunt-toed, cloth-legged boots, also “previously used.”
This costume looked all the more comical because he was wearing pincenez.
Nerzhin emerged from the search pleased with himself. Anticipating an early
transfer, he had equipped himself yesterday afternoon with two sheets of paper
and penciled them over with a closely written text incomprehensible to anyone
else—simply omitting vowels or using Greek words or a medley of Russian,
English, German, and Latin words, often abbreviated. To make sure of getting
them past the searchers, Nerzhin had torn each sheet slightly, crumpled it, as
people sometimes crumple paper for its secondary use, and stuffed it into a
pocket of his camp trousers. The guard searching him had seen these pieces of
paper but drawn the wrong conclusion and left them with him. Now, if he
didn’t take them into the cell in Butyrki but left them with his belongings, they
might survive even longer.
These sheets of paper contained in succinct form some of the facts and
thoughts consigned to the flames earlier that day.
The search was over, and all twenty prisoners were herded into the empty
waiting room with the things they were permitted to take along. The door
closed behind them, and a sentry was posted outside it while they waited for
the prison truck. Yet another guard was detailed to patrol the slippery patch
under the windows and shoo away anyone who turned up during the lunch
break to say good-bye.
Thus, all ties between the 20 departing prisoners and the 261 staying behind
were severed.
The transferees were still there, yet they were there no longer.
At first, seating themselves randomly on the benches or on their belongings,
they were all silent.
Their minds were still on the search, each man going over what had been
taken from him and what he had managed to get through.
And on the institute: all the blessings they were leaving behind with it, how
much of their sentence they had served there, and how much remained to be
served.
Time checks are the prisoner’s hobby: calculating how much of his life has
been lost and how much is still destined to be lost.
They were thinking, too, of their families, with whom they would be out of
touch at first and whose help they would need to seek again; the Gulag is a
country in which a grown man working twelve hours a day cannot earn enough
to feed himself.
And thinking of the blunders or deliberate actions that had earned them
transportation.
Wondering where they would be sent, what awaited them in their new place,
and how they would adjust to it.
Each of them had his own thoughts, but all were equally somber.
Every one of them was in need of reassurance, of hope.
So when some of them began discussing again the possibility that they would
be sent not to a camp but to another special prison, even those who did not for
one moment believe it listened.
Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane, though he knew for sure that he must
drain the bitter cup, nonetheless hoped and prayed.
Khorobrov, trying to repair the handle of his suitcase, which kept coming
away from its fastening, was swearing loudly.
“The bastards, the swine can’t even make a simple suitcase in this country.
The shift in honor of May Day takes up half the year, the shift in honor of
October the other half. They have to do everything in a frantic rush. Look at
this—some bastard’s labor-saving idea—they just bend a bit of wire at both
ends and shove it through the handle. It’ll hold when the case is empty, but wait
till you fill it! They’ve developed heavy industry—damn and blast it!—but the
humblest old-time village craftsman would die of shame if he made this stuff!”
Khorobrov picked up two lumps of brick that had come away from a stove
built in the same slapdash way and tried viciously to hammer the ends of the
handle into the lug.
Nerzhin understood Khorobrov very well. Whenever he ran into a
humiliation, a slight, an insult, a rebuff, Khorobrov was furious, but how could
anyone be calm and reasonable about such things? Could a man under torture
howl politely? At that very moment, arrayed in his prison-camp costume and
on his way to the Gulag, Nerzhin himself felt as if he were regaining an
important constituent of masculine freedom: the right to make every fifth word
an obscene one.
Romashov was talking quietly to the novices, telling them by what routes
prisoners were usually taken to Siberia, comparing the Kuybyshev, the Gorky,
and the Kirov transits and highly recommending the first.
Khorobrov stopped hammering and angrily hurled his brick to the floor,
reducing it to red crumbs.
“I can’t bear to listen!” he yelled at Romashov, with an agonized look on his
lean, hard-bitten face. “Gorky was never in prison in the place named after
him, nor Kuybyshev in the other; otherwise, they’d both have been buried
twenty years earlier. Be a man and call them by their proper names: Samara,
Nizhny Novgorod, and Vyatka transit prisons! You’ve chalked up twenty years
—why truckle to our masters?”
Khorobrov’s vehemence was catching. Nerzhin rose, summoned Nadelashin
through the sentry, and declared in a ringing voice, “Junior lieutenant! We can
see through the window that it is now twelve thirty, and lunch is in progress.
Why aren’t they bringing us any?”
The junior lieutenant shuffled uneasily and answered sympathetically.
“You’ve been . . . taken off the ration strength today.”
“What do you mean, taken off?” And encouraged by the buzz of discontent
behind him, Nerzhin rapped out: “Report to the prison commandant that
without lunch we go nowhere! And we won’t let them load us forcibly!”
The junior lieutenant caved in—“All right, I’ll inform him”—and hurried off
guiltily to tell his superior officer.
No one in the room paused to ask himself whether it was worth getting
involved. The niggling self-respect of the free and well-fed is alien to the zek.
“Good for you!”
“Keep them on the run!”
“Stingy bums!”
“Skinflints! I work three years, and they begrudge me one lunch!”
“We just won’t leave! It’s that simple! What can they do to us?”
Even those who were meek and docile with the prison staff day in and day
out plucked up their courage. The free wind of the transit prisons was blowing
in their faces. This farewell meal with meat was not only their last chance to
eat their fill before the months and years of thin gruel ahead; it was an
assertion of their human dignity. And even those whose throats were so dry
with anxiety that they could not have forced themselves to eat—even they
forgot their misery for a while and eagerly demanded that meal.
The path connecting Prison HQ with the kitchen was visible from the
window. They could see, too, a truck backing toward the wood yard, carrying
a big Christmas tree, with its boughs jutting out over the sides. The prison
officer in charge of supplies and stores alighted from the cab, and a guard
sprang down from the back.
Yes, the lieutenant colonel had kept his word. Tomorrow or the next day, they
would put the tree up in the semicircular room; prisoners—fathers without
their children transformed into children themselves—would trim the tree with
toys (lavishing the state’s time on their preparation), Klara’s little basket, a
bright moon in a glass cage; and men with beards and mustaches would join
hands and dance around the tree with wry laughter and try to drown the wolf’s
howl of their own fate with their singing.
A Christmas tree was born in the woods,
In the woods a tree grew. . . .
They could see the guard on patrol outside shooing Pryanchikov away—he
was trying to break through to the windows under siege, shouting something
and raising his hand to the heavens.
They saw the junior lieutenant trotting anxiously to the kitchen, back to HQ,
back to the kitchen again, back to HQ again. . . .
They saw, too, that Spiridon had been turned out before he could finish his
lunch to help unload the tree, wiping his mustache and adjusting his belt as he
went.
The junior lieutenant finally almost ran to the kitchen and shortly after led out
two cooks carrying between them a large can and a ladle. A third woman
followed them with a stack of deep bowls. Afraid of slipping and breaking
them, she came to a stop. The junior lieutenant turned back and took some of
the bowls from her.
Everyone in the room shared the excitement of victory.
Lunch appeared in the doorway. The women began ladling out soup
immediately. Zeks carried their dishes to their own corners, to windowsills, or
to their suitcases. Others stood, leaning over the table where there were no
benches in their way.
The junior lieutenant and the soup dispensers went out. Silence reigned, the
pristine silence that should always accompany eating. They were thinking—
here’s a soup with some fat in it, a bit watery, but you can smell the meat: first
one spoonful, then another, then a third with little spangles of fat in it and
shreds of meat boiled white. I’m pouring it all into myself; the warm wetness
passes through my gullet, down into my stomach, and my blood and muscles
rejoice in anticipation of replenishment and new strength.
Nerzhin remembered an old saying: “A woman marries for meat; a man
marries for soup.” He took this to mean that the man would have to find the
meat and the woman would use it to make the soup. There were no pretenses
and no lofty pretensions in the common people’s proverbial sayings. The folk
were even more frank about themselves in their huge stock of proverbs than
Tolstoy and Dostoevsky in their confessions.
The soup was nearly finished, and the aluminum spoons were scraping the
bottoms of the dishes, when someone sighed: “Ye-e-e-es.”
And a voice from the corner answered: “Now comes the big fast, lads.”
Some faultfinder chimed in: “They ladled it from the bottom of the pot, but it
was pretty thin stuff. I reckon they fished the meat out for themselves.”
But someone else called out dolefully: “Will we live to eat the like of it
again?”
Then Khorobrov tapped his empty plate with his spoon and said, almost
choking with resentment: “No, friends! Bread and water is better than tart and
trouble!”
Nobody answered him.
Nerzhin started banging on his plate and demanding the main course.
The junior lieutenant appeared immediately.
“Finished?” he asked, surveying the transferees with a friendly smile. And
satisfied with the amiable looks produced by being full, he made an
announcement that his experience of prisons had suggested would be better not
made earlier.
“There’s no second course left. They’re washing the pot now. Sorry.”
Nerzhin looked around at the prisoners, wondering whether it was worth
making a fuss. But Russians are easily mollified, and they had all cooled off.
“What was the second course?” a deep voice boomed.
“Stew,” the junior lieutenant said, with a diffident smile.
They sighed.
They somehow forgot all about the third course.
Outside, an engine was sputtering. A shouted command set the junior
lieutenant free. Lieutenant Colonel Klimentiev’s stern voice could be heard in
the corridor.
They were led out one by one.
There was no roll call with identity check because the prison institute’s own
convoy guards would be escorting the zeks as far as Butyrki and handing them
over there. But they were counted, each of them checked off as he took that all
too familiar and always fateful step from the ground onto the high footboard of
the police truck, lowering his head so as not to bump it on the steel lintel, bent
double under the weight of his belongings, and clumsily banged them against
the sides of the doorway.
There was no one to see them off: The break was over, and the zeks had been
shepherded back indoors from the exercise yard.
The truck had been backed right up to the threshold of the HQ building. The
prisoners were spared the frenzied barking of guard dogs while they were
boarding, but there was the usual crush, the usual jostling. The guards, as
always, were eager to get it over with, which made no difference to anyone
except themselves, but their haste inevitably affected the prisoners, so that they
had no opportunity to look around and take stock of their situation.
Of the first eighteen seated, not one looked up to say good-bye to the tall,
graceful lime trees that had shaded their sorrows and their joys for so many
years past.
The two who did contrive to look about them, Khorobrov and Nerzhin,
looked not at the lime trees but at the side of the truck itself, for a particular
reason: They wanted to know what color it was painted.
It was as they expected.
They thought back to the times when lead-gray-and-black police trucks
scoured the streets, striking terror into the citizens. There was a time, long ago,
when this was judged necessary. But in the golden epoch that followed, even
police trucks were required to mirror its smiling face. Some genius had an
inspiration: Police trucks would be designed to look exactly like food delivery
trucks, painted with the same orange and light blue stripes, and bearing the
legend in four languages:
Khleb Pain Brot Bread
or
Myaso Viande Fleisch Meat
Nerzhin, as he climbed into the truck, managed to twist around and read the
word “Meat”; then it was his turn to squeeze through the narrow door and the
even narrower second door, walk over somebody’s feet, drag his case and
sack over somebody’s knees, and take his seat.
Inside, this three-ton truck was not “boxed,” that is to say, not divided into
ten iron boxes, into each of which one single prisoner would be squeezed. No,
this was a truck of the “general” type, meaning that it was meant for the
transport not of prisoners under investigation but those already sentenced,
which greatly increased its “live freight” capacity. In its rear section, between
the two iron doors with their small ventilation grilles, the truck had a narrow
space for the guards. They could lock the inner doors from the outside and the
outer doors from the inside and communicate with the driver by means of a
speaking tube running through the bodywork of the truck. There was barely
room for two guards with their legs tucked up under them. The rear
compartment was further reduced in size by a single small box to house any
refractory prisoner. Otherwise, the rear of the truck was one single low-roofed
metal box, a single communal mousetrap, and the prescribed number of men to
be squeezed into it was, in fact, twenty. (If you kept the iron door latched by
wedging two pairs of booted feet against it, you could squeeze a few more in.)
A bench ran around three walls of the mousetrap, leaving only a small space
in the middle. Those who managed to find a place sat down, but they were not
the luckiest; when the truck was crammed full, other people and other people’s
belongings landed on their cramped legs. Neither protests nor apologies had
any point in this crush, and it would be an hour or so before they could change
positions. The guards had put their shoulders to the door and locked it after
shoving the last man in.
But they had not yet slammed the outer door of the guard’s compartment.
Someone else set foot on the rear step, and a new shadow obscured the view
through the ventilation grille.
“Hey, guys!” Ruska’s voice. “I’m due at Butyrki for investigation! Who are
these? Who’s being moved?”
There was an immediate explosion of voices: all twenty zeks answering him,
both guards telling Ruska to shut up, and Klimentiev calling out from the
doorway of HQ ordering the guards to keep their minds on the job and prevent
the prisoners from calling out to one another.
“Be quiet, you. . . ,” somebody said, using an obscene word.
It was quiet again, and the guards could be heard rearranging their legs so
that they could stuff Ruska into the box quickly.
“Who told on you, Ruska?” Nerzhin called out.
“Siromakha!”
Several voices chorused, “The rat!”
“How many of you are there?” Ruska shouted.
“Twenty.”
“Who’s there altogether?”
But this was where they shoved him into the box and locked it.
“Keep your chin up, Ruska,” they shouted. “We’ll meet in the camp!”
As long as the outer door was open, a little light reached the interior of the
truck. But then it was closed with a bang, and the heads of the guards prevented
the last faint light from reaching them through the grilles in both doors. The
engine rumbled, the truck shuddered and began moving, and now as it jolted
along, only occasional gleams of reflected light played on the zeks’ faces.
A brief exchange of shouts from cell to cell, like a hot spark leaping between
flint and iron, always excites prisoners.
“What are the elite supposed to do in a labor camp?” Nerzhin spoke loudly
but close to Gerasimovich’s ear, so that no one else could hear him.
“The same as everybody else, only working twice as hard,” Gerasimovich
answered in another loud whisper.
The truck stopped when they had gone a little way. Obviously at the
guardhouse.
“Ruska,” a prisoner called out, “did they beat you up?”
A muffled reply came after some delay. “Yes, they did.”
“Damn and blast all Shishkin-Myshkins!” Nerzhin shouted. “Don’t let them
get you down, Ruska!”
Several voices were raised at once, and no one could make himself heard
above the hubbub.
The truck moved on again, past the guardhouse; then they were all rocked
sharply to the right, which meant that they were turning left onto the highway.
Gerasimovich and Nerzhin swayed toward each other, shoulders touching, at
the turn. They looked around, trying to distinguish each other’s faces in the half
dark. It was not just their cramped quarters that made them feel so close.
“I’m not a bit sorry I’ve left the place, men,” Khorobrov said. “What sort of
life do you have in a special prison? You can’t walk along a hallway without
bumping into some Siromakha. One in every five there is a snitch. If you fart in
the bathroom, the godfather hears about it right away; we’ve had no Sundays
for two years, the bastards. And a twelve-hour working day. You swap your
brains for twenty grams of butter. They banned letters to and from home—damn
and blast them! Just work, work, work. It’s hell on earth!”
Khorobrov fell silent, overcome with indignation.
Nerzhin’s voice rose in reply above the sound of the engine, which was
quieter now that they were driving along the asphalt highway.
“No, Ilya Terentich, that isn’t hell. That is not hell! Hell is where we’re
going. We’re going back to hell. The special prison is the highest, the best, the
first circle of hell. It’s practically paradise.”
He left it at that—no need to say more. They all knew, of course, that
something incomparably worse than the special prison awaited them. They
knew that, from the camp, Marfino would be remembered as a golden dream.
But for the present, to keep their spirits up, and to feel that they had done the
right thing, they had to curse the special prison, so that no one would feel any
lingering regret or reproach himself with a rash act.
“When war breaks out, they’ll kill off the zeks in special prisons with
poisoned bread, like the Hitlerites did, because they know too much.”
“Well, that’s what I keep telling you,” Khorobrov exclaimed. “Bread and
water is better than cake and woe.”
As their ears grew accustomed to the noise of the engine, the zeks fell silent.
Yes, what awaited them was the taiga and the tundra, the Cold Pole at
Oymyakon, the copper mines at Dzhezkazgan. What awaited them yet again
was the pickax and the wheelbarrow, a starvation ration of half-baked bread,
hospital, death. They could look forward to nothing but the worst.
Yet in their hearts they were at peace with themselves.
They were gripped by the fearlessness of people who have lost absolutely
everything—such fearlessness is difficult to attain, but once attained, it
endures.
SWINGING THE COMPRESSED mass of bodies to and fro, the gaily painted
orange-and-blue truck swished along the city streets, passed one of the
stations, and pulled up at a crossing. A dark red car was held up by traffic
lights at the same road junction. It belonged to the Moscow correspondent of
the newspaper Libération, who was on his way to a hockey match in the
Dynamo stadium. The correspondent read the words on the side of the truck:
Myaso Viande Fleisch Meat
He had made a mental note of several such trucks seen in various parts of
Moscow that day. He took out a notebook and jotted down in dark red ink:
“Every now and then, one encounters on the streets of Moscow food delivery
trucks, spick-and-span and impeccably hygienic. There can be no doubt that the
capital’s food supplies are extremely well organized.”
About the Author
ALEKSANDR I. SOLZHENITSYN was born in Kislovodsk, Russia, on December
11, 1918. He earned a degree in mathematics and physics from Rostov
University and studied literature through a correspondence course from the
Moscow Institute of History, Philosophy, and Literature. A captain in the
Soviet Army during World War II, he was arrested in 1945 for criticizing
Stalin and the Soviet government in private letters. He was sentenced to eight
years of incarceration, to be followed by “perpetual” internal exile, but was
cleared of all charges in 1957 as part of Nikita Khrushchev’s campaign of deStalinization.
Solzhenitsyn vaulted from unknown schoolteacher to
internationally famous writer in 1962 with the publication of his novella One
Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, which Khrushchev himself authorized.
The writer’s increasingly vocal opposition to the regime resulted in another
arrest, a charge of treason, and expulsion from the USSR in 1974. For eighteen
years of his exile, he and his family lived in Vermont. In 1994 he returned to
Russia, thus fulfilling his longstanding prediction. He died in his home in
Moscow on August 3, 2008.
Solzhenitsyn’s major works include the novels In the First Circle and
Cancer Ward, the memoirs The Oak and the Calf and Invisible Allies, the
massive cycle of historical novels with the series title The Red Wheel, and the
monumental history of the Soviet prison system The Gulag Archipelago, which
Time magazine named the Best Nonfiction Work of the Twentieth Century. In
1970 Solzhenitsyn received the Nobel Prize in Literature.
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite
HarperCollins authors.
Also by Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn
Fiction
One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich (1963)
Cancer Ward (1968)
Stories and Prose Poems (1971)
August 1914 (The Red Wheel: Knot I) (1972)
November 1916 (The Red Wheel:Knot II) (1999)
Nonfiction
Nobel Lecture (1972)
Letter to the Soviet Leaders (1974)
The Gulag Archipelago, 1918–1956: An Experiment in Literary Investigation (1974)
From Under the Rubble (1975)
Warning to the West (1976)
A World Split Apart (1978)
The Oak and the Calf: Sketches of Literary Life in the Soviet Union (1980)
The Mortal Danger (1980)
Rebuilding Russia: Reflections and Tentative Proposals (1991)
Invisible Allies (1995)
“The Russian Question” at the End of the Twentieth Century (1995)
Poetry
Prussian Nights: A Poem (1977)
Drama
The Love-Girl and the Innocent: A Play (1969)
Candle in the Wind (1973)
Prisoners: A Tragedy (1983)
Victory Celebrations: A Comedy in Four Acts (1983)
Credits
COVER DESIGN BYMILAN BOZIC
COVER PHOTOGRAPH © PHOTOPIPS/SHUTTERSTOCK IMAGES
Copyright
IN THE FIRST CIRCLE. Copyright © 2009 by Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn. All rights reserved
under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required
fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the
text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced into any
information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic
or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission
of HarperCollins e-books.
FIRST EDITION
Designed by Joy O’Meara
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr Isaevich, 1918–2008.
[V kruge pervom. English]
In the first circle : a novel / Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn ; translated by Harry T. Willetts.
— 1st Harper Perennial ed.
p. cm.
ISBN 978-0-06-147901-4
1. Soviet Union—Politics and government—1917–1936—Fiction. 2. Soviet Union—-
Politics and government—1936–1953—Fiction. 3. Political persecution—Soviet Union—
Fiction. I. Willetts, H. T. II. Title.
PG3488.O4V23 2009
891.73'44—dc22
2008039336
09 10 11 12 13 OV/RRD 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
EPub Edition © February 2012 ISBN: 9780062194886
About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (P.O. Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
www.harpercollins.com.au/ebooks
Canada
HarperCollins Canada
2 Bloor Street East -20th Floor
Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada
http://www.harpercollins.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollins Publishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.harpercollins.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollins.com