Chapter-73-A-Circle-of-Wrongs

THE DOOR FROM THE BEDROOM to the dining room was ajar, and he heard the
wall clock’s single loud stroke and the lingering echoes that followed.
Half-past something. Adam Roitman would have looked at his wristwatch,
which was ticking away sociably on the bedside table, but he was afraid that
switching the light on suddenly would awaken his wife, who slept sometimes
on her side and sometimes prone, with her face pressed against her husband’s
shoulder.
They had been married nearly five years, but feeling her close to him,
sleeping in her funny way, warming her chilly little feet between his legs, made
him feel tenderly protective even when he was only half awake.
Adam had woken from an uneasy sleep. He would have liked to go to sleep
again, but last night’s news and the unpleasantness at work came back to him,
anxious thoughts chased one another, his eyes refused to close, and he was in
that middle-of-the-night wide-awake state in which it is useless trying to sleep.
The buzz of voices, the shuffling of feet, and the noise of furniture moved
around in the Makarygins’ apartment overhead had gone on late into the night
but had long since ceased.
A faint grayish light seeped in through the gap where the curtains did not
quite meet.
In his night attire, flat on his back, and sleepless, Adam Veniaminovich
Roitman no longer felt that his position was secure and himself a cut above
other people, as he did in the daytime, thanks to his epaulets (major, Ministry
of State Security) and his medal (Stalin Prize winner). He lay there supine and
felt, like any ordinary mortal, that the world was overpopulated and unkind and
that living in it was not easy.
Last night, when the merrymaking at the Makarygins’ was in full swing, an
old friend of Roitman’s, also Jewish, had called on him. He had arrived
without his wife, very worried, full of stories about fresh harassments,
discriminatory regulations, dismissals, and even banishment.
None of this was news. It had begun last spring, with the apparently innocent
mention in brackets of the Jewish names that certain theater critics had
dropped. Then it had crept into literature. In one scandal sheet, a pink
newspaper that dabbled in everything except what was supposed to be its
concern—literature—someone had whispered the poisonous word
“cosmopolitan.” The word they had all been waiting for! A beautiful word, a
proud word, a word that made the whole world one. At one time, it had been
bestowed on the noblest of geniuses—Dante, Goethe, Byron—but in this gutter
newspaper it became a pallid, wizened, hissing thing and now meant only . . .
“Jew.”
After which it crept away, shamefacedly hiding in files behind closed doors.
Now the cold draft had reached the scientists. In the past month Roitman,
who had been steadily, brilliantly advancing toward glory, had suddenly felt
the ground giving way under his feet.
Did his memory deceive him? During the Revolution and for a long time
afterward, “Jew” had meant “more reliable than Russians.” Russians were
checked further back. Who were your parents? What was their source of
income before 1917? Jews were all in favor of the Revolution. Then, suddenly,
lurking behind the backs of a bunch of nobodies, who should take on the role of
scourge of the Israelites but Joseph Stalin?
If a group of people are persecuted because they were once oppressors, or
members of a privileged caste, or because of their political views, or their
circle of acquaintance, there is always a rational (or pseudorational?)
explanation for it. You are always aware that you yourself have chosen your
lot, that you need not have stayed in that particular group. But . . . nationality?
(Here Roitman’s nocturnal interlocutor lodged an objection: People surely did
not choose their social origins either but were punished for them.)
But what hurt Roitman most was that you may want with all your heart to
belong, to be like everybody else, yet you are snubbed, rejected, told that you
are an outsider, a lost soul. A Jew.
The wall clock in the dining room began striking with unhurried dignity.
Roitman had listened for the fifth stroke but was glad that there were only four.
Still time to get some sleep.
He changed position. His wife cleared her throat without waking and
instinctively snuggled up again to her husband.
There was not the slightest sound from his son, asleep in the dining room. He
never cried out or called them.
The clever three-year-old was the pride of his young parents. Adam
Veniaminovich delighted in telling even the prisoners in the Acoustics Lab
about his son’s funny little ways and mischievous pranks. With the insensitivity
common in happy people, he failed to realize that this could be painful to men
deprived of fatherhood. (He thought it a convenient topic of conversation; it
brought him closer to the prisoners without in any way compromising him.)
The child prattled away fluently, but his pronunciation was shaky. He imitated
his mother in the daytime and his father in the evening. (His mother’s brogue
was from somewhere along the Volga. Adam’s speech was thick, and there
were regrettable faults in his pronunciation.)
Happiness, if it comes at all, often knows no bounds. This was the case with
Adam. Love, marriage, and the birth of his son had come at the end of the war,
together with his Stalin Prize. Not that the war had been hard on him. Roitman
and some who were now his friends in the Marfino Institute had spent the war
in peaceful Bashkiria earning good money from the Commissariat of the
Interior for their work on the first coded telephone system. That system looked
primitive now, but it had brought them their Stalin Prize. What enthusiasm,
what passion they had put into it! Where had it all gone, that enthusiasm, that
eagerness to learn, those flights of fancy?
With the keen-sightedness of a man lying awake in the dark with nothing to
divert his inward gaze, Roitman suddenly realized what had been lacking in the
last few years. Once, he had done it all himself. Now he did not.
He had slipped—when? how?—from the role of creator to that of a
supervisor of creators. . . .
Like a man scalded, he took his arms from around his wife and hitched his
pillow higher.
Yes, yes, yes! It was so easy, so irresistibly pleasant, when you were leaving
for home on Saturday evening, enjoying in anticipation the two nights and a day
of domestic comfort ahead and preoccupied with your plans for Sunday, to say,
“Valentin Martynych! Don’t forget now, you’ll have to come up with some way
of eliminating those nonlinear distortions tomorrow! Lev Grigorievich! You
will take a look at that article in Proceedings tomorrow, won’t you? And make
a brief list of the main points?” When he returned to work refreshed on
Monday morning, it was like a fairy tale; an abstract in Russian of the article in
Proceedings would be on his desk, and Pryanchikov would report on ways to
eliminate nonlinear distortions, if he hadn’t done the job himself on Sunday.
A very comfortable setup!
Nor did the prisoners feel any resentment toward Roitman. Indeed, they liked
him. Because he behaved toward them like a normal decent human being, not a
jailer.
But the creative experience, the joyous lightning flash of inspiration, the
mortification of unexpected setbacks—all that was a thing of the past.
He freed himself from the bedspread and sat up in bed, clasping his knees
and resting his chin on them.
What had he been doing all these years? Intriguing. Fighting for the top place
in the institute. He and some of his friends had done everything they could to
blacken and topple Yakonov, believing that his eminence and savoir faire
would put them in the shade and that he would monopolize the Stalin Prize. His
younger colleagues took advantage of the fact that Yakonov, with his tarnished
past, would never be admitted to the Party, and they made Party meetings the
arena for their attacks on him. They would call on him to make a report, then
either ask him to withdraw or discuss it in his presence and adopt a resolution
(on which only Party members were allowed to vote). According to these
Party resolutions, Yakonov was always in the wrong. Roitman sometimes felt
sorry for him—momentarily.
But there was no other way.
What a menacing turn things had now taken! The “youngsters” did not stop to
think, when they were harrying Yakonov, that four out of the five of them were
Jews. And now Yakonov never wearied of proclaiming from every possible
platform that cosmopolitanism was the socialist fatherland’s most vicious
enemy.
Yesterday had been a fateful day in the history of the Marfino Institute. After
the minister’s outburst, the prisoner Markushev had come up with the idea of
combining the clipper and the “vocoder.” It probably made no sense, but it
could be presented to the higher-ups as a radical improvement, and Yakonov
had given instructions for the immediate transfer of the vocoder unit,
Pryanchikov with it, to Number Seven. Roitman was quick to object, in
Selivanovsky’s presence, but Yakonov patted him on the shoulder, as though he
were a hotheaded friend who had to be humored, and said: “Adam
Veniaminovich! Don’t make the deputy minister think that you put your special
interests above those of the Department of Special Technology.”
That was what made the present situation so tragic. They punch you in the
kisser, and you mustn’t cry! They try to wring your neck in broad daylight, and
you’re expected to stand up and applaud!
The clock struck five. He had missed the half hour.
He wasn’t at all sleepy and was beginning to feel uncomfortable in bed.
Very carefully, one foot at a time, Adam slipped out of bed and into his
slippers. Noiselessly, avoiding a chair in his way, he went to the window and
drew the silk curtains a little farther apart.
What a lot of snow had fallen!
Directly across the yard was the neglected far end of Neskuchny Sad. Its
steep slopes were blanketed with snow and overgrown with stately whitedecked
pines. White fluff outlined the window frame.
But the snowfall was almost over.
The radiator under the window was rather hot to his touch.
There was another reason why he had achieved so little as a scientist in
recent years: He had been driven to distraction by meetings and paperwork.
Politics class every Monday, technical class every Friday, Party meetings
twice monthly, Party bureau meetings also twice monthly; he was summoned to
the ministry in the evening two or three times a month; there was a special
discussion on security once a month; a monthly research plan had to be drawn
up, a monthly progress report written; personal reports on every prisoner had
to be sent in for some reason every three months (a whole day’s work, that).
And then some subordinate would come along every half hour to get his
signature; every wretched little condenser the size of a bonbon, every meter of
wire, every radio valve, needed a signed authorization from the head of the
laboratory, without which the stockrooms would release nothing.
If only he could get rid of all that red tape, give up the battle for supremacy,
pore undisturbed over his diagrams, handle a soldering iron, locate his
miraculous curve through the greenish eye of an electronic oscillograph, he
would sing “boogie-woogie” as lightheartedly as Pryanchikov. What bliss it
would be not to feel those epaulets pressing on his shoulders, forget the need to
keep up appearances, to be himself, like a small boy—and make something,
use his imagination.
“Like a schoolboy!” A random memory of himself as a boy, an episode he
had not remembered for many years, surfaced in his night thoughts with pitiless
clarity.
Twelve-year-old Adam, wearing his Young Pioneer’s scarf, stood before an
assembly of all the Young Pioneers in his school, a look of noble outrage on
his face, denouncing an agent of the class as an enemy in a trembling voice and
demanding his expulsion both from the Young Pioneers and from their Soviet
school. The previous speakers, Mitka Shtitelman and Mishka Luksemburg, had
also joined in exposing Oleg Rozhdestvensky as an anti-Semite, a churchgoer,
a person of alien social origin, annihilating the trembling culprit with their
hostile gaze.
It was the end of the twenties, when for boys like Adam life meant politics,
wall newspapers, classroom democracy, earnest debate. In that southern town
about half of the group was Jewish. Some of the boys were the sons of
lawyers, dentists, or small traders, but they were all fantastically insistent on
their proletarian origin. Whereas this classmate of theirs tried not to talk about
politics, moved his lips soundlessly when they sang the “Internationale” in
chorus, and had joined the Pioneers with obvious reluctance. The enthusiasts
among the boys had long suspected him of being a counterrevolutionary. They
had watched him closely, hoping to catch him. They had not been able to prove
that he was of suspect origin. But Oleg gave himself away one day by saying
that “everyone has the right to say whatever he thinks.” Shtitelman pounced on
him: “Whatever he thinks? Nikola once called me an ugly Yid. Is that allowed,
too?”
That was the origin of the case against Oleg. Friends of his came forward to
denounce him. Shurik Burikov and Shurik Vorozhbit had seen the culprit going
into the church with his mother and coming to school with a little cross around
his neck. A round of meetings followed—pupils’ committee, group committee,
Pioneer assemblies, playground huddles—and at all of them twelve-year-old
Robespierres came forward and in the presence of the studying masses
stigmatized the abettor of anti-Semites and peddlers of religious opium, who
had been too frightened to eat for a fortnight and had told no one at home that
he had been expelled from the Pioneers and would shortly be expelled from
school.
Adam Roitman had not been the ringleader—he had been drawn into it by
others—but even now his cheeks burned with shame and self-disgust when he
thought of it.
Insult and injury had come full circle! And there was no way out, just as
there was no escape from his contest with Yakonov.
Where should you start reforming the world? With other people? Or with
yourself?
By now his head was heavy enough, and his heart empty enough, for him to
sleep.
He went back and crawled quietly under the blanket. He simply must go to
sleep before it struck six.
In the morning he would step up the work on phonoscopy! That could be his
trump card! If he succeeded with that, the project might expand into a separate
Research Inst. . . .