Chapter-59-The-Buddha’s-Smile

“THE EVENTS RECORDED in our remarkable narrative relate to that famous
summer of blazing heat in 194– when prisoners outnumbering the proverbial
cartload of monkeys languished, clad only in loincloths, in stifling air behind
the fishy-eyed opacity of the world-renowned Butyrki Prison’s muzzled
windows.
“What can one say of that useful and smoothly functioning establishment? It
traced its ancestry to the barracks of Catherine the Great. In the cruel age of
that empress, bricks were not grudged for those fortresslike walls and vaulted
arches.
The stately castle was constructed
As castles should constructed be.
“After the death of Voltaire’s enlightened pen pal, those hollow halls where
once the clumsy tramp of carabineers’ jackboots reechoed were derelict for
many long years. But as progress, universally longed for, advanced upon our
fatherland, the royal descendants of the aforesaid imperial lady thought fit to
accommodate there both heretics, who sought to rock the Orthodox throne, and
obscurantists, who stood in the way of progress.
“The mason’s trowel and the plasterer’s spatula helped divide those
enfilades into hundreds of commodious yet cozy cells, while the unsurpassed
skill of our fatherland’s blacksmiths forged unbendable bars for the windows
and tubular bed frames to be lowered for the night and raised by day. The
finest craftsmen among our talented serf population made their precious
contribution to the immortal fame of Butyrki Castle; weavers wove sackcloth
covers for the bed frames, plumbers laid an ingenious sewage system,
tinsmiths riveted together capacious four- and six-gallon night buckets with
handles and even lids, carpenters cut feeding flaps in the doors, glaziers
installed spy holes, locksmiths fitted locks, and in the ultramodern times of
People’s Commissar Yezhov a special breed of craftsmen in reinforced glass
poured opaque, molten glass over wire netting and erected those ‘muzzles,’
unique of their kind, which shut off from the heinous prisoners the last visible
corner of the prison yard, the prison chapel, and a patch of blue sky.
“For the convenience of guards with, as a rule, only rudimentary education,
the curators of the Butyrki rest home had exactly twenty-five bed frames fixed
to the walls of each cell, making possible simple arithmetical calculations:
Four cells equals a hundred head of prisoners; one corridor, two hundred.
“And so for decades on end, this therapeutic establishment flourished,
without ever incurring the censure of society and without complaint from
prisoners. (Witness the infrequency of censure and complaints in Stock
Exchange Gazette and, subsequently, their total absence from Workers’ and
Peasants’ Deputies’ News—Izvestia, for short.
“But time was not on the side of the major general in charge of Butyrki
Prison. Even in the early days of the Second World War, it proved necessary to
exceed the statutory norm of twenty-five to a cell and to install additional
inmates, who were left without bunks. When the surplus assumed menacing
proportions, bed frames were left permanently lowered, the sacking covers
were replaced by boards, and the triumphant major general and his colleagues
started wedging fifty men into each cell. Then, after the historic victory over
Hitlerism, as many as seventy-five. This, again, posed no problem for the
guards: They knew that there were now six hundred head to a corridor and
were paid a bonus.
“In this congestion it no longer made sense to give out books, chess sets, and
dominoes; there weren’t enough to go around anyway. As time went by, the
enemies of the people received a smaller and smaller bread ration, fish was
replaced by the flesh of amphibians and hymenoptera, and cabbage and nettles
by cattle fodder. The dreaded Pugachev Tower, where the empress had kept
that hero of the people on a chain, was now made to serve a pacific purpose as
a silo.
“People poured in; new prisoners arrived all the time; oral traditions faded
and were garbled; people forgot, if they had ever known, that their
predecessors had reclined on canvas sacking and read banned books (it was
only from prison libraries that the authorities forgot to remove them). When
ichthyosaurus broth and silage soup were borne into the cell in steaming pails,
the prisoners drew their feet up onto the bedboards, drew their knees up tightly
to their chests in the confined space, and braced themselves on all four paws,
and in this canine posture, baring their teeth like so many yard dogs, kept a
sharp eye on how much swill was ladled into each bowl. The pails made their
round, ‘from the night bucket to the window’ and ‘from the window to the
radiator,’ after which the inhabitants of the bedboards and of the kennels
underneath them, fell to, threatening each other’s bowls with tails and paws,
and the only sound to disturb the philosophical silence of the cell was that of
seventy-five mouths slurping life-giving porridge.
“And everyone was content. Neither in the trade union newspaper Trud nor
in the Bulletin of the Moscow Patriarchate was a single complaint to be
found.
“Cell 72 was a cell among other cells with nothing to distinguish it from the
rest. It was already doomed, but the prisoners peacefully dozing under its
bedboards or cursing on top of them knew nothing of the horrors in store. On
the eve of the fatal day, they were as usual making leisurely preparations for
bed on the cement floor near the night bucket or lying in their drawers on the
bedboards, fanning themselves (the air was hot and stagnant, because the cell
was not ventilated from one winter to the next), killing flies, and telling each
other how nice it had been in Norway or in Iceland or in Greenland during the
war. The time sense that all zeks perfect by long practice told them that there
were only five minutes left before the screw on duty bellowed through the
feeding flap, ‘Come on, get to bed, it’s after time!’
“But suddenly the prisoners’ hearts missed a beat as they heard keys turning
in the locks! The door flew open, and there stood a dapper captain with white
gloves, looking ex-treme-ly agitated. A retinue of lieutenants and sergeants
buzzed behind him. In funereal silence the zeks were led out into the corridor
‘with belongings.’ (A whisper went around that they were on their way to be
shot.) In the corridor five times ten men were counted off and bundled into
neighboring cells just in time to grab a bit of sleeping space. These fortunate
ones had escaped the fearful fate of the other twenty-five. The last thing those
left outside their well-loved Cell No. 72 saw was some sort of infernal
machine with a sprayer attached to it driving in through their door. Then they
were made to do a right turn and marched, to the rattling of guards’ keys against
belt buckles and the snapping of fingers (recognized signals in Butyrki meaning
‘prisoner under escort approaching’), through several internal steel doors and
down several flights of stairs to a hall, which was not the execution cellar, not
an underground torture chamber, but the changing room, well known to the zek
tribe, of the celebrated Butyrki baths. The dressing room had a suspiciously
innocent, everyday look—the walls, benches, and floor covered with
chocolate brown, red, and green tiles, the carts noisily trundling on rails from
the heat sterilization room with diabolical hooks to hang prisoners’ lousy
clothes on. Playfully slapping and punching (for the prisoner’s Third
Commandment is ‘grab what’s offered’), the zeks scrambled for the red-hot
hooks and hung on them their long-suffering clothes, already discolored,
singed, and in places burned through by fumigation at ten-day intervals, while
two old crones, hell’s sweltering handmaidens, long since indifferent to the
sight of naked prisoners, rolled the clattering carts into Tartarus, slamming the
iron doors behind them.
“The twenty-five prisoners were left in the changing room, locked in on all
sides. They had nothing in their hands except handkerchiefs or strips torn from
shirts, which served the same purpose.
“Those of them whose skinny frames retained a thin layer of leathery flesh on
that modest part of the body by means of which nature has blessed us with the
gift of sitting—those happy souls seated themselves on warm stone benches,
inlaid with emerald and reddish brown tiles. (The Butyrki bathhouse is far
superior in the luxury of its fittings to the Sandunovski baths, and the story goes
that curious foreigners sometimes gave themselves up to the Cheka just to
enjoy a bath there.)
“Other prisoners, so emaciated that they could only sit on something soft,
paced the antechamber from end to end, making no attempt to cover their shame
and seeking to penetrate the veil of mystery in heated arguments.
Their starved imaginations
Hungered for fatal sustenance. . . .
“They were, however, kept in the antechamber for hours on end, so that
speculation flagged, their bodies were covered with heat spots, and their
stomachs, accustomed as they were to sleep from 10:00 p.m. on, pleaded
piteously to be filled. The dominant party was now that of the pessimists, who
held that poison gas was already seeping in through the gratings in the walls
and floor and that they would all shortly die.
“But a door burst open, and everything changed. The usual two guards in
dirty dustcoats with hair-choked clippers to shear the sheep did not appear, nor
were two or three pairs of the bluntest scissors on earth thrown in for the
prisoners to break bits off their nails, oh no! Instead, four apprentice barbers
wheeled in four stands with brilliantine, hair cream, nail varnish, and even
theatrical wigs. Four ample and imposing master barbers, two of them
Armenians, followed. And right there in the barber’s shop, by the door, they
. . . no, they didn’t shave the prisoners’ pubic regions pressing on the blunt
clippers with all their might in sensitive spots; instead, they dusted the area
with pink powder. The prisoners’ withered cheeks felt the feather-light touch of
a razor, and their ears were tickled with a whispered ‘Is that uncomfortable?’
Their heads were not close-cropped; indeed, they were offered wigs. Their
chins were not scalped; customers who so wished were left with the
beginnings of beards and sideburns-to-be. Meanwhile the apprentice barbers
were prostrate, trimming toenails. In conclusion, as they went through the door
to the baths, they were not asked to hold out their hands for a twenty-gram
splash of evil-smelling goo; instead, a sergeant stood there handing each man,
against a signed receipt, one sponge, daughter of the coral reefs, and one whole
bar of Lilac Fairy toilet soap.
“After this they were locked in the bathhouse, as usual, to wash to their
heart’s content. But the prisoners were not interested in washing. Their
arguments were hotter than the Butyrki’s hot water. The dominant party now
was that of the optimists, who held that Stalin and Beria had fled to China, that
Molotov and Kaganovich had embraced Catholicism, that Russia now had a
provisional government of Social Democrats, and that elections to the
Constituent Assembly were already under way.
“At this point the familiar exit door was opened with the ritual clatter, and in
the mauve vestibule a series of most extraordinary happenings awaited them;
each man was given a fleecy towel . . . and a full bowl of oatmeal porridge, the
equivalent of six daily portions for a convict at hard labor. The prisoners
threw their towels on the floor and, without spoons or other aids, bolted the
porridge down at astonishing speed. Even the major there present, who had
grown old in the prison service, was surprised and ordered another bowl all
around. They ate another bowl each. What came next none of you will ever
guess. They brought in . . . not frostbitten, not rotten, not black, but what may be
called normal, edible potatoes.”
“Now you’ve gone too far,” Potapov’s hearers protested. “That simply can’t
be true!”
“But that’s just how it was! True, they were of the pig potato variety, small
and unpeeled, and after they’d already filled their stomachs, the zeks might
have refused to eat them, but the diabolical cunning of the thing was that the
potatoes were brought not in individual portions but in one common bucket.
The prisoners rushed at it with savage howls, inflicting painful knocks upon
one another and scrambling over one another’s bare backs, and within a minute
the empty bucket was rolling over the stone floor with a clatter.
“By that time their naked bodies had dried. The old major ordered the zeks to
pick their towels up from the floor and addressed them as follows: ‘Dear
brothers! You are all honest Soviet citizens, only temporarily isolated from
society, some for ten, some for twenty-five years, for your not-too-serious
misdemeanors. In spite of the lofty humanism of the Marxist-Leninist creed, in
spite of the clearly expressed will of the Party and government, in spite of the
repeated instructions of Comrade Stalin in person, those in charge of Butyrki
Prison have many errors and irregularities to account for. These are now being
corrected.’
“They’re sending us home! the zeks brazenly decided.
“ ‘Henceforth we shall treat you as though you were at a holiday resort.’
“Their spirits sank: We’re not getting out!
“ ‘In addition to all that was previously allowed, you are now allowed
(a)to worship your own gods;
(b)to lie on your bunks, whether by day or by night;
(c)to leave the cell and go to the bathroom without let or hindrance;
(d)to write your memoirs.
“ ‘In addition to things previously prohibited, you are now forbidden
(a)to blow your noses on sheets and curtains, the property of the state;
(b)to ask for second helpings;
(c)to contradict the authorities or complain about them when important
visitors enter your cell;
(d)to take Kazbek cigarettes from the table without asking.
“ ‘Anyone who breaks one of these rules will be punished with fifteen days
in an unheated punishment cell and consigned to one of the remoter camps
without the right to correspondence. Is that clear?’
“Scarcely had the major concluded than . . . what? Did the carts rattle out of
the heat-disinfection chamber bearing the prisoners’ underwear and their
tattered jackets? No, the hell that had swallowed their rags did not return them,
but in came four nice young linen keepers, demurely blushing and smiling
sweetly at the prisoners, as if to reassure them that they still had some hopes as
men, and began distributing sky blue silk underwear. Then the zeks were given
fine cotton shirts, discreet ties, bright yellow American shoes, received under
Lend-Lease,
*
and synthetic worsted suits.
“Speechless with dread and delight, the prisoners were marched back in
columns of two to their own Cell No. 72. But heavens, what a transformation!
“Out in the hallway their feet stepped on to a strip of rich carpet leading
enticingly to the bathroom. Then, as they entered the cell, currents of fresh air
played around them, and the immortal sun shone right into their eyes. (The night
had gone by while they were busy, and it was now bright morning.) They found
that during the night the bars had been painted pale blue, the ‘muzzles’ taken
down from the windows, and on the former Butyrki chapel, within the prison
yard, a swiveling mirror had been fixed and a guard stationed there to adjust it
so that a steady stream of reflected sunlight played upon the windows of Cell
No. 72. The walls of the cell, a dark olive green only yesterday, had been
sprayed with bright gloss paint, on which artists had depicted doves with
streamers in their beaks, inscribed ‘We are for Peace!’ and ‘Peace to all the
World!’
“The bug-ridden bedboards might never have existed. Canvas underlays had
been stretched onto the bed frames, with mattresses and feather pillows tucked
into them, and sparkling white blankets and sheets peeped from under
coquettishly turned-down spreads. By each of the twenty-five bunks stood a
locker, long shelves on the walls held books by Marx, Engels, Saint Augustine,
and Thomas Aquinas, and in the middle of the cell stood a table with a
starched tablecloth and on it flowers in a vase, an ashtray, and an unopened
pack of Kazbeks. (All the other extravagances of this magical night were
regularized by clever bookkeepers, but Kazbek cigarettes were too much of a
luxury to be concealed under any heading on an expense account. The prison
commandant had decided to spring for a pack of Kazbeks himself, which was
why the penalty for misuse of them was so stiff.)
“But the greatest transformation was in the corner where the night bucket
used to stand. The wall had been washed spotlessly clean and painted. A big
lamp flickered before an icon of the Virgin and Child; nearby was the miracle
worker Saint Nicholas of Mirlikia, in gleaming vestments, and a tall statue of a
Catholic Madonna on a stand, while in a shallow recess, left for some reason
by the original builders, there were copies of the Bible, the Koran, and the
Talmud, and a small, dark bust of the Buddha. The Buddha’s eyes were half
closed and the corners of his lips drawn back so that a smile seemed to play on
his dark bronze face.
“Replete with porridge and potatoes and staggering under the unmanageable
abundance of new impressions, the zeks undressed and fell asleep at once. A
gentle zephyr stirred the lace curtains at the windows, which gave no
admittance to flies. A guard stood at the half-open door to see that nobody
swiped the Kazbeks.
“They luxuriated undisturbed till noon, when the white-gloved captain
hurried in extra-ord-in-arily flustered and announced that it was time to rise.
The zeks quickly dressed and straightened their beds. A small round table with
a white dustcover was then pushed into the room, copies of Bonfire, The USSR
Builds, and America were placed upon it, two antique armchairs on casters
and also dust-sheeted were wheeled in, and an unbearable silence, full of
foreboding, followed. The captain tiptoed between the beds, carrying a
handsome white stick to rap the fingers of those who reached for America.
“In the agonizing silence the prisoners listened. As you very well know from
your own experience, hearing is the most important of the prisoner’s senses.
His vision is usually limited by walls and ‘muzzles’; his sense of smell is
overwhelmed by ignoble odors; there are no new objects for him to touch. But
his hearing develops to an extraordinary degree. He identifies sounds
immediately, even those from the far end of a corridor; he can tell the time by
them and interpret what is going on, whether they’re bringing the hot water
around, taking somebody outside for exercise, or passing on a parcel.
“Hearing brought the beginnings of a solution to the riddle; the steel grating
near Cell No. 75 clanged, and a large number of people entered the corridor.
The prisoners heard hushed exchanges and footsteps muffled by carpets; then
they could distinguish women’s voices and the rustle of skirts, after which the
governor of Butyrki Prison appeared right at the door of Cell No. 72 and said
cordially, ‘And now Mrs. Roosevelt might be interested in visiting one of our
cells. Which shall it be? Let’s pick one at random. No. 72 here, for instance.
Open up, Sergeant.’
“And into the cell came Mrs. Roosevelt, accompanied by a secretary, an
interpreter, two respectable matrons of the Quaker persuasion, the prison
commandant, and several persons in civilian clothes or MVD uniforms. The
white-gloved captain withdrew into the background. Mrs. Roosevelt, widow
of the president and as progressive and penetrating as her late husband, had
done much in defense of human rights and had now made it her business to visit
America’s valiant ally and see for herself how UNRRA aid was distributed
(noxious rumors had reached America that UNRRA’s groceries did not reach
the common people) and also whether in the Soviet Union freedom of
conscience was in any way restricted. She had already been shown simple
Soviet citizens (Party officials and MGB officers in disguise), who in their
rough workmen’s overalls thanked the United States for its disinterested aid.
Now Mrs. Roosevelt had insisted on visiting a prison. Her wish had been
granted. She sat down on one of the armchairs, her retinue arranged itself
around her, and exchanges through the interpreter began.
“Sunlight reflected from the swiveling mirror still flooded the cell. The
breath of Aeolus gently stirred the curtains.
“Mrs. Roosevelt was very pleased to find that in a cell chosen at random and
taken unawares, everything was so amazingly white, there was a complete
absence of flies, and, although it was a working day, the lamp before the icon
was aglow.
“At first the prisoners were too shy to stir, but when the interpreter translated
the distinguished visitor’s first question—‘was it to keep the air clean that not
one of the prisoners was smoking?’—one of them rose casually, unsealed the
box of Kazbeks, lit one, and offered a cigarette to a friend.
“The major general looked black.
“ ‘We are fighting against smoking,’ he said with heavy emphasis, ‘because
tobacco is poisonous.’
“Another prisoner sat down at the table and began scanning America, for
some reason very rapidly.
“ ‘What are these people being punished for? That gentleman reading the
magazine, for instance?’ the distinguished visitor asked.
“ ‘That gentleman’ had been given ten years for rashly making the
acquaintance of an American tourist.
“ ‘That man,’ the major general answered, ‘was an active Hitlerite; he served
in the Gestapo, personally burned a Russian village down, and raped, if you’ll
excuse the word, three Russian peasant women. The number of infants killed
by him is incalculable.’
“ ‘Has he been sentenced to death by hanging?’ Mrs. Roosevelt cried.
“ ‘No, we have hopes of reforming him. He has been sentenced to ten years
of honest labor.’
“The prisoner’s face expressed suffering, but instead of intervening, he
continued reading the magazine with fevered haste.
“At that moment a Russian Orthodox priest with a big mother-of-pearl
pectoral cross just happened to walk into the cell, evidently making his normal
round, and was flummoxed to find senior officers and foreign guests there.
“He made as if to withdraw, but his modest demeanor pleased Mrs.
Roosevelt, and she asked him to carry on doing his duty. The priest promptly
thrust a pocket Testament on one of the bewildered prisoners, sat down on
another prisoner’s bed, and addressed the man, who was petrified with
surprise. ‘Well then, my son, you asked me last time to tell you about the
sufferings of Our Lord Jesus Christ.’
“Mrs. Roosevelt requested the major general to ask the prisoners in her
presence whether any of them wished to address a complaint to the United
Nations.
“ ‘Attention, prisoners!’ the major general said menacingly. ‘What were you
told about the Kazbeks? D’you want a spell in the cooler?’
“The prisoners had been as silent as if they were under a spell, but now a
babble of indignant voices arose:
“ ‘Citizen governor, we’ve got nothing to smoke!’
“ ‘We’re going out of our minds.’
“ ‘We left the stash in our other trousers!’
“ ‘We just didn’t know.’
“The illustrious lady saw the unfeigned indignation of the prisoners, heard
their heartfelt protests, and listened to the translation all the more attentively:
‘They unanimously protest against the distressing situation of the blacks in
America and ask the UN to look into the matter.’
“Some fifteen minutes passed in agreeable dialogue of this sort. The moment
came when the duty officer for the hallway reported to the commandant that
dinner had arrived. The guest asked them not to mind her and to go ahead with
serving the meal. The door was opened wide, and pretty young waitresses
(probably the linen keepers in different uniforms) brought in tureens containing
a simple chicken soup with noodles and ladled it into bowls. Instantly it was
as though a primitive reflex had transformed the well-behaved prisoners: They
jumped up on their beds in their shoes, pressed their knees to their chests,
placed their hands palm down beside their feet, and in this canine posture
watched with jealous eyes how much soup went into each bowl. The
philanthropic ladies were shocked, but the interpreter explained to them that
such was the Russian national custom.
“The prisoners could not be persuaded to sit at the table and eat with the
electroplated nickel spoons. They had already fished out their own worn
wooden spoons, and no sooner had the priest said grace and the waitresses
carried the plates around to the beds, informing them that there was a dish on
the table for the disposal of bones, than a terrible suctional tutti was heard,
followed by a concerted crunching, and all that had been put on the plates
vanished forever. The dish for disposal of bones was not required.
“ ‘Maybe they’re hungry?’ the anxious visitor absurdly suggested. ‘Maybe
they want some more?’
“ ‘Nobody want more?’ the general asked hoarsely.
“Nobody did. They all knew the wise camp saying, ‘Ask for more, and you’ll
get it from the law.’
“However, the zeks swallowed meatballs and rice with the same
indescribable rapidity.
“Compote was not on the menu, as it was a weekday.
“Fully assured that the stories spread by ill-wishers abroad were malicious
lies, Mrs. Roosevelt left the cell with her retinue and said outside in the
corridor: ‘How uncouth, how primitive these unfortunates are! We can hope,
however, that after ten years here they will have acquired some culture. This is
a magnificent prison you have!’
“The priest left with the retinue, skipping out before the cell door was
slammed.
“When the guests had left the corridor, the white-gloved captain darted back
into the room.
“ ‘On your feet!’ he yelled. ‘Line up in pairs! Out in the corridor!’
“And observing that not everyone had understood his words correctly, he
clarified them for the benefit of laggards with the sole of his boot.
“Only then was it discovered that one ingenious zek had taken permission to
write memoirs literally and, while the others were all asleep in the morning,
had racked up two chapters: ‘How I Was Tortured’ and ‘Encounters in
Lefortovo.’
“The memoirs were promptly impounded and the overeager writer booked
for further investigation on a charge of ‘foully libeling the Organs of State
Security.’
“Once again with snapping of fingers and jingling of keys—‘prisoner and
escort’—they were led through numerous steel doors to the changing room,
iridescent as ever with its malachite green and ruby red tiles. There they were
relieved of everything they had been given, right down to the sky blue silk
underwear, and an especially thorough body search was carried out, in the
course of which one zek was found concealing in his cheek the Sermon on the
Mount, torn out of a Testament. For this he was slapped on his right cheek, then
made to turn his left. The coral-reef sponges and the Lilac Fairy were also
taken from them, and once again every zek was made to sign his name in
confirmation.
“Two guards in dirty overall coats came in and set about shearing the
prisoners’ pubic areas with blunt and clogged clippers, then denuded cheeks
and skulls with the same instruments. In conclusion, twenty grams of evilsmelling
liquid soap substitute were poured into each palm, and they were all
locked in the bathhouse. There was nothing for it—the prisoners washed yet
again.
“Then the exit door was opened with the ritual clatter, and they went out into
the violet vestibule. Two aged women, handmaidens of hell, thunderously
trundled their carts out of the heat-disinfection chamber, and there on the redhot
hooks hung the rags that our heroes knew so well.
“Dejectedly they returned to Cell No. 72, where they found their fifty
comrades lying once more on the bug-ridden bedboards, burning with curiosity
to learn what had happened. The windows were again blocked with ‘muzzles,’
the doves painted over with dark olive paint, and a four-gallon night bucket
stood in the corner.
“Nothing had been forgotten, except the little bronze Buddha enigmatically
smiling in his niche.”
* Lend-Lease: The large-scale program of United States aid supplying the
Allies with military equipment during World War II.