Chapter-80-One-Hundred-Forty-Seven-Rubles

BEFORE LUNCH, the duty officer, Zhvakun, pinned up in the hallway of the
special prison a list of those who were to report to Major Myshin during the
break. Officially, a prisoner was summoned in this way to receive letters or to
be informed of a remittance credited to his account.
The delivery of a letter to the inmate of a special prison was a secretive
procedure. In the world outside, you would simply entrust it to a peripatetic
mailman, but nothing so crude was possible here. The prisoner’s spiritual
father—or godfather—having read the letter himself to make sure that it
contained no treasonable thoughts, handed it to the prisoner behind closed
doors, with a few edifying remarks. No attempt was made to disguise the fact
that the letter had been opened, so that any illusion of intimate contact between
the prisoner and his nearest and dearest was destroyed. A letter that had passed
through many hands, been minutely examined for useful additions to a man’s
dossier, and received internally the censor’s smudgy black stamp lost all
personal significance. It had become a state document. In some special prisons
this was so well understood that a prisoner’s letter was not handed over at all:
He was merely allowed to read it, twice if he was lucky, in the godfather’s
office, and sign it to confirm that he had done so. If a prisoner reading a letter
from his wife or mother made notes to aid his memory, he aroused as much
suspicion as if he had been caught copying General Staff documents. A
prisoner in such a place also had to sign photographs sent from home to
confirm that he had seen them, after which they were added to his prison
dossier.
So, then, the list was posted, and prisoners stood in line for their letters.
With them stood others who wished to dispatch the one letter each of them was
allowed for December. This, too, had to be handed to the godfather. Under
cover of these operations Major Myshin could summon his stoolies for
unscheduled meetings and talk to them without fear of interruption. So that it
would not be obvious which interviews were most important to him, he
sometimes detained an honest zek or two and kept the others guessing.
This meant that everyone in the line was suspected by someone. Sometimes,
however, they knew exactly who was putting their lives “in pawn” and smiled
at him ingratiatingly.
Soviet penal practice, though not based directly on the experience of Cato the
Elder, faithfully followed his injunction not to let slaves be too friendly with
one another.
As the lunch bell rang, zeks rushed up from the basement and across the yard
without coats and caps—the wind was damp but not cold—and darted through
the door of the prison HQ. Because new regulations governing correspondence
had been announced that morning, the line was unusually long—some forty men
—and there was no room for all of them in the hallway. The duty officer’s
assistant, a martinet sergeant major, brought all the resources of a ripe
physique into play, counted off twenty-five men, and told the rest to take a walk
and come back during the supper break. Those allowed in he lined up against
the wall, well away from the bosses’ offices, and he paced the hallway
continually to keep order. Each zek in turn walked past several doors, knocked
at Major Myshin’s office, and awaited permission to enter. When he emerged,
the next man was admitted. The sergeant major directed the traffic throughout
the lunch break.
Spiridon had begged to be given his letter early in the morning, but Myshin
had been adamant. He would get it, like all the others, in the lunch break. But
half an hour before lunch Major Shikin had summoned him for questioning. If
Spiridon had made the required statement and admitted everything, who
knows, he might have been in time to get his letter. But he had dug his heels in.
Major Shikin could not let him leave unchastened. So he had sacrificed his
lunch break (and anyway, he preferred to avoid the crush in the free workers’
dining room) to continue his interrogation.
First in the line for letters was Dyrsin, an engineer from Number Seven, a
key member of its staff, and a wreck of a man. It was more than three months
since he had received a letter. He kept asking Myshin, but “Nothing for you”
and “Nobody’s writing” were all the answers he got. He asked Mamurin to
send somebody to look. Waste of breath. Nobody was sent. But today his name
was on the list, and fighting against the pain in his chest, he had rushed to be
first in line. He had no family left except for a wife as worn-out by ten years of
waiting as he was.
The sergeant major waved Dyrsin in, and Ruska Doronin was now next.
Ruska, with his devil-may-care grin and floppy blond forelock. Seeing the
Latvian, Hugo, one of his confidants, behind him in line, tossed his hair back,
winked, and said in a whisper, “I’m here to collect my money. Money I’ve
earned.”
“Move up,” the sergeant major ordered.
Doronin shot forward, passing Dyrsin as he returned dejected.
“Well?” Amantai Bulatov, his workmate, asked Dyrsin, once they were out in
the yard.
Dyrsin’s face, always unshaved, always doleful, looked even longer.
“I don’t know. He says there is a letter, but come back after the break and
we’ll talk.”
“Bastards!” Bulatov said, with a flash of anger through his horn-rimmed
glasses. “I keep telling you they hold our letters back. Refuse to work!”
“They’d pin a second sentence on me,” Dyrsin said with a sigh. He was
always hunched, his head drawn down into his shoulders, as though he had
been struck sharply from behind with something heavy.
Bulatov sighed with him. If he was so militant, it was because he still had so
much time to do. A zek becomes less and less sure of himself as the day of
release draws nearer. Dyrsin was into his last year.
The sky was an unrelieved gray, with no darker clouds and no gleam of light.
It had no depth; it was not vaulted; it was like a dirty tarpaulin stretched above
the earth. The snow had settled into a porous mass under the keen wet wind,
and its morning whiteness was beginning to look rusty. It hardened into
slippery brownish hillocks under the feet of men taking exercise.
But the constitutional went on as usual. The weather would never be foul
enough to make prisoners wilting for lack of air in the sharashka forgo their
walk. After long confinement they enjoyed being buffeted by gusts of damp
wind that blew the stale air and stale thoughts out of a man.
The engraver darted to and fro among the strollers, took one zek after another
by the arm, and asked his advice. His plight, as he saw it, was singularly
dreadful. He had been unable to formalize his marriage in prison, and now his
partner (his first) was not regarded as his legal wife. He had no right to
correspond with her and, since he had used up his allowance of letters for
December, no means of letting her know that he would not be writing. People
sympathized with him. His position was indeed absurd. But each of them felt
his own pain more keenly than the next man’s.
Kondrashov-Ivanov, tall, stiff as a ramrod, and hypersensitive, moved
slowly along, gazing over the heads of the walkers, and informed Professor
Chelnov in an ecstasy of pessimism that when your dignity was trampled
underfoot, to go on living was to debase yourself. Any man with courage had a
simple way to escape this chain of humiliations.
Professor Chelnov, wearing his eternal woolen hat and his plaid shawl
around his shoulders, contented himself with a quotation from Boethius’s De
Consolatione Philosophiae.
A group of volunteer stoolie hunters had gathered near the entrance to HQ:
Bulatov, whose voice carried right across the yard; Khorobrov; Zemelya, the
amiable fellow from the Vacuum Lab; Dvoetyosov, sporting his Gulag jacket
on principle; quick-witted Pryanchikov, who had a finger in every pie; Max,
the leader of the Germans; and one of the Latvians.
“The country needs to know who its stoolies are!” Bulatov repeated,
encouraging them in their determination not to disperse.
“We’ve got a pretty good idea already,” Khorobrov answered, standing in the
doorway and running his eyes over the men standing in line. He could be fairly
sure of some of those lining up for their thirty pieces of silver. But of course it
was only the least clever among them who aroused suspicion.
Ruska rejoined the company. It cost him an effort not to flourish his money
order. Heads together, they all hurriedly inspected it. It was from a mythical
Klavdia Kudryavtseva, addressed to Rostislav Doronin, and for 147 rubles!
Returning from lunch, Artur Siromakha, supersquealer and stoolie supreme,
took his place at the end of the line and ran his lackluster eyes over the stoolie
hunters. He looked the group over because he made a habit of noting
everything, but for the moment he attached no importance to it.
Ruska retrieved his money order and left the group, according to plan.
The third man to enter the godfather’s office was the forty-year-old electrical
engineer who, in the privacy of the old sanctuary the night before, had opined
that ministers and sewers were more or less the same thing, then had become a
child again and started a pillow fight on the upper bunks.
The fourth to enter, with his quick, light step, was Viktor Lyubimichev.
Always hail-fellow-well-met, he would bare his teeth in a winning smile and
address young and old alike as “Old pal.” This easy cordiality hinted at a
guileless nature.
The electrical engineer reappeared in the doorway with an open letter. He
was so absorbed in his reading that he almost missed the step. Still unseeing,
he descended sideways, and no one in the group of hunters bothered him. He
was lightly dressed and bareheaded, with the wind ruffling his hair, which was
still that of a young man in spite of all he had been through. He was reading his
first letter, after eight years of separation, from his daughter Ariadne, a fairhaired
six-year-old clinging around his neck when he had left for the front en
route to POW camp and then a Soviet jail. When he had heard prisoners of war
crunching layers of typhus-carrying bugs underfoot in their huts and stood in
line for four hours or more for a ladleful of foul-smelling dishwater soup, the
memory of that precious little bundle of brightness drew him on, as Ariadne’s
thread had drawn Theseus, to survive and return. But back in his native land,
he had gone straight to jail without seeing his daughter. She had been evacuated
with her mother to Chelyabinsk. They had remained there. Ariadne’s mother
had found another partner, and it was a long time before she told the girl that
her father still existed. In a painstaking, slanting schoolgirl hand, Ariadne had
written, without blots:
Dear Papa, hello!
I didn’t answer before because I didn’t know where to start and what to
write. I can be forgiven for that because I had gotten used to thinking
that my father had died. It seems quite strange that I suddenly have a
father.
You want to know what sort of life I have. It’s the same as everybody
else’s. You can congratulate me on joining the Komsomol. You ask me to
tell you if there’s anything I need. I need lots of things, of course. Right
now I’m saving up for some boots, and to get a light overcoat made.
Papa! You say come and visit you. But is it really urgent? To travel some
place a long way of looking for you wouldn’t be very nice, would it?
You’ll come here when you’re able. I wish you success in your work. So
long for now.
I kiss you.
Ariadne
Papa, have you seen the movie First Glove? It’s marvelous. I never miss
a single movie.
“Shall we check up on Lyubimichev?” Khorobrov asked.
“Forget it, Terentich,” they protested. “Lyubimichev’s one of us.”
But, deep down, Khorobrov sensed that there was something wrong with the
man. And right now he had been closeted too long with the godfather.
Viktor Lyubimichev had big, wide-open eyes. Nature had endowed him with
the supple body of an athlete, a soldier, and a lover. Life had plucked him from
the running tracks of the Young Athletes’ Stadium and planted him in a
Bavarian concentration camp. In that deathtrap, into which their enemies
herded Russian soldiers whose own Soviet government denied the Red Cross
access to them—in that small, jam-packed hellhole—only those who most
decisively renounced narrow, class-conditioned notions of virtue and
conscience survived: the man who acted as interpreter and betrayed his
comrades, the man who became a camp orderly capable of striking fellow
countrymen in the face with his stick, the man who worked as a bread cutter or
a cook and ate the bread of the starving. There were two other possible routes
to survival: working as a gravedigger or as a sanitary orderly. For digging
graves and for cleaning out latrines, the Nazis allowed an extra ladleful of
porridge. Two men could manage the latrines, while fifty or so went
gravedigging every day. Day in and day out, a dozen hearses carted the dead
away to be dumped. Summer 1942 was approaching, and with it the turn of the
gravediggers themselves. Viktor Lyubimichev, with the ardor of an organism
that had lived too little, longed to go on living. He resolved that if he was to
die, he would die last, and showed himself willing to become a camp orderly.
But by a lucky chance a shady character who appeared to have once been a
Soviet political officer turned up in the camp, urging them to go and fight the
Communists. Men signed on, Komsomols among them. There was a German
army cookhouse outside the camp gate where volunteers were allowed to “eat
their bellyful” of gruel. Afterward, Lyubimichev had fought in France, hunting
down Resistance fighters in the Vosges, then defending the Atlantic Wall
against the Western Allies. During the great trawl of ’45, he somehow slipped
through the net, went home, married a girl as bright-eyed and lissome as
himself, and left her behind in their first month when his past caught up with
him. The prison population at the time included Russians who had served with
the very same Resistance movement that Lyubimichev had hunted in the Vosges.
In Butyrki, prisoners played dominoes furiously, reminisced about life and
battles in France, and hoped for parcels from their families. Then they were all
given a level ten years. So Viktor Lyubimichev’s whole life had conditioned
him to believe that nobody, from the man in the street to the man in the
Politburo, ever had, or ever could have, principles; nor could those who
presumed to judge them.
Clear-eyed and suspecting nothing, he made no attempt to avoid the hunters
but walked straight up to them, holding what looked very much like a postal
money order.
“Brothers, who’s eaten? What’s the main course? Is it worth going?”
Khorobrov nodded at the piece of paper in Viktor’s lowered hand.
“Get much?” he asked. “Enough to go without lunch?”
Lyubimichev shrugged it off.
“No, not a lot,” he said, trying to stuff the receipt into his pocket. He hadn’t
bothered to hide it sooner because they all feared his strength, and he thought
that no one would dare to challenge him. But while he was talking to
Khorobrov, Bulatov, as if in fun, bent down, craned his neck, and pretended to
read: “Hey! One thousand four hundred and seventy rubles! You can tell
Klimentiadis where to stick his grub now!”
If it had been any other zek, Viktor would have made a joke of it, shoved his
face away, and hidden the money order. But Amantai could not be left thinking
that his subordinate was rolling in money. Gulag rules forbade it. So
Lyubimichev pleaded not guilty. “Where’s the thousand? Look for yourself!”
They all saw that the order was in fact for 147 rubles.
“Funny they couldn’t send a level 150,” Amantai said coolly. “Off you go
then, schnitzel for seconds.”
But before he had finished speaking and before Lyubimichev could move on,
Khorobrov was up in arms. He had forgotten that he was supposed to contain
himself, smile, and ride on with the hunt. Forgotten that what mattered was
identifying stoolies; destroying them was impossible. He had suffered too
much from them, seen so many others come to grief because of them. He hated
those snakes in the grass more than honest hangmen. Now somebody young
enough to be his son and handsome enough to be a sculptor’s model had turned
out to be one of those volunteer reptiles.
“Scumbag!” Khorobrov blurted out. “Buying remission with our blood!”
Lyubimichev, a fighter and always ready for a fight, flinched and drew his
fist back for a short-arm jab.
“Bog-trotting half-wit,” he said menacingly.
But Bulatov forestalled him. “Cut it out, Terentich,” he said, restraining
Khorobrov.
While Dvoetyosov, a clumsy giant in a Gulag donkey jacket, seized
Lyubimichev’s raised right fist with his own left hand and held it tight.
“Buddy, buddy,” he said, with a contemptuous smile. His voice was so tense
that it might have been a lover’s whisper. “No politics here!”
Lyubimichev turned abruptly, and his clear, wide eyes were very close to
Dvoetyosov’s myopic stare.
He did not raise his other fist. Those owl-like eyes and the grip of a peasant
hand told him that if a blow was struck, one or the other of them would not just
fall over but would drop dead.
“Buddy, buddy,” Dvoetyosov said again. “The main course is schnitzel. Go
eat your schnitzel.”
Lyubimichev wrenched himself free and made for the basement steps with his
head in the air. His satin-smooth cheeks were aflame. He was wondering how
to get even with Khorobrov. He still didn’t realize how seriously the
accusation had damaged him. He would allow no one to question his worldly
wisdom. But he evidently had a lot to learn.
How could they have guessed? Where had they gotten it from?
Bulatov watched him go and held his head in his hands.
“Mother, oh Mother!” he said. “Who can you trust after that?”
This whole scene had involved little movement, so that neither the
promenading zeks nor the two guards stationed on the boundaries of the
exercise yard had noticed anything. Only Siromakha, standing in line and
looking back through the doorway, had seen it all through half-closed, tired
eyes—and understood!
“Listen, boys,” he said to those ahead of him, “I’ve left a circuit switched on.
Could you let me go first? I’ll be quick.”
They laughed. “Everybody’s left something switched on! We’ve all got
babies to mind!”
They wouldn’t let him pass.
“I just want to go and switch it off!”
Siromakha sounded worried.
He rounded the hunting party, vanished into the main building, and ran up to
the third floor without pausing to get his breath. But Major Shikin’s office door
was locked from inside; the key was in the lock. An interrogation? A tryst with
the gawky secretary? Siromakha withdrew, defeated.
He should have rejoined the line, but the instinct of a hunted animal was
stronger than his need to earn his keep. The thought of walking back past that
group of infuriated men terrified him. They could lay hands on him without
provocation. He was only too well known in the sharashka.
Meanwhile, Doctor of Chemical Sciences Orobintsev, a small bespectacled
person wearing the expensive fur coat and hat he had worn when free (he had
arrived at Marfino without seeing the inside of a transit prison and had not yet
been “unloaded”), had emerged from his interview with Myshin and assembled
a group of simple souls like himself, including the bald-headed designer. He
had an announcement to make. A man, of course, believes mainly what he
chooses to believe. Those who wanted to believe that submitting a list of
relatives was not the same as denouncing them but rather a sensible regulatory
procedure formed Orobintsev’s present audience. He had already presented his
own list of names, arranged in neat columns, and spoken to Myshin. Now he
was authoritatively relaying the major’s clarification of certain points: where
to enter the names of minors and what to do if you were not their natural father.
Myshin had offended the professor’s sense of propriety only once. When
Orobintsev had said regretfully that he could not remember exactly where his
wife was born, Myshin had bared his fangs and said, “Pick her up in a
whorehouse, did you?”
Now the gullible innocents were listening to Orobintsev instead of joining
the group sheltering under three lime trees with Abramson at its center.
Abramson, lazily smoking after an ample lunch, was telling his audience that
there was nothing new about these restrictions on correspondence, that it used
to be even worse, that the ban would not last forever but only until some
minister or general was replaced, so there was no need to be downhearted, but
meanwhile they should, if possible, refrain from submitting a list until it all
blew over. Abramson was naturally slit-eyed, and when he removed his
glasses, his gaze seemed to show more plainly than ever his boredom with the
prison world. He had seen it all before; the Gulag Archipelago could hold no
new shocks for him. He had been in prison so long that he seemed to have lost
all feeling, and what to other people was a tragedy he accepted as merely a
modification of routine.
Meanwhile, the hunters, reinforced in numbers, had caught another stoolie;
there were jokes all around as they extracted a pay stub for 147 rubles from
Isaak Kagan’s pocket. When asked how much he had been given, he said
“nothing”: He had been sent for by mistake; he had no idea why. When they
forcibly extracted the pay stub and cried shame on him, Kagan not only did not
blush, not only did not hurry away, but clung to one of his accusers after
another, swearing over and over again that it was a pure misunderstanding, that
he would show them all the letter from his wife saying that she had been three
rubles short at the post office and so could only send 147. He even tried to
drag them off to the battery-charging room to show them this letter. Shaking his
shaggy head and oblivious of the scarf slipping from around his neck and
almost trailing on the ground, he gave a very plausible explanation of his
failure to reveal in the first place that he had received a money order. Kagan
was by nature the most tenacious of bores. Once start talking to him, and your
only hope of escape was to acknowledge that he was absolutely right and let
him have the last word. Khorobrov, who occupied the next bunk, knew that
Kagan had been arrested for “failure to report” (failing to denounce someone)
and so could not get duly angry. He merely said: “What a shit you are, Isaak!
Outside, thousands wouldn’t buy you. Here you sell yourself for hundreds!”
But maybe they’d threatened to send him to a camp?
Isaak, unabashed, kept pleading innocence and might have ended by
convincing them all. But in the meantime they had caught another informer, a
Latvian this time. Their attention was diverted, and Kagan walked away.
The second shift was summoned to lunch, and the first emerged to take
exercise. Nerzhin, wearing his overcoat, came up the steps. He spotted Ruska
Doronin immediately, standing on the boundary of the exercise yard. Ruska,
eyes triumphantly shining, gazed upon the hunt he had organized but glanced
from time to time at the free workers’ yard and the approach from the main
road. Klara would shortly arrive by bus for the evening shift and pass that way.
He grinned at Nerzhin. “See that?” he said, nodding toward the hunt. “Heard
about Lyubichimev?”
Nerzhin stopped and gave him a hug.
“Congratulations! But I’m afraid for you.”
“Pah! You haven’t seen anything yet. This is just the start.”
Nerzhin shook his head, laughed, and walked on. He met Pryanchikov, all
smiles as he hurried off to lunch, hoarse from shouting at the stoolies in his
light voice.
He greeted Nerzhin with a laugh.
“You’ve missed the whole show, pal! Where’s Lev?”
“He has an urgent job to do. He can’t come out for the break.”
“What, more urgent than Number Seven? Ha-ha! No job’s that urgent.”
He hurried away.
Mixing with no one, avoiding conversation, Bobynin, a big man with a
shaved head that was uncovered whatever the weather, and little
Gerasimovich, with his crumpled cloth cap pulled down over his eyes and the
collar of his short overcoat turned up, strode in circles of their own. Bobynin
looked as if he could have comfortably swallowed Gerasimovich.
Gerasimovich shivered in the wind and kept his hands in his coat pockets. A
puny sparrow of a man.
The sparrow in the proverb, with a heart as big as a cat.