Chapter-06-A-Peaceful-Existence

GLEB NERZHIN WAS THE SAME AGE as Pryanchikov but looked older. His
auburn hair, parted in the middle, was still thick, but there were crow’s feet
around his eyes, little wrinkles around his mouth, and furrows across his brow.
His skin was affected by the lack of fresh air, and his face had a wilted look.
But what above all made him seem older was the economy of his movements:
that economy by which nature conserves the flagging strength of prisoners in
the camp. In the sharashka, with meat on the menu and work that overstrained
no one’s muscles, Nerzhin, with the length of his sentence in mind, was
nonetheless trying to make a habit of minimal movement.
At present, Nerzhin’s desk was barricaded with piles of books and files, and
the working space in between had also been taken over by files, typescripts,
books, and journals, Russian and foreign, all left open. Any unsuspecting
outsider would have seen the stillness after a hurricane of scientific thought.
But it was all camouflage. Nerzhin always put up a front in the evening in
case one of the bosses looked in.
In fact, he had no eyes for anything before him. He had pulled back the light
silk curtain and was staring through the dark windowpane. In the depths of the
vast night, big patches of light marked the outskirts of Moscow, and from the
city itself, hidden behind a hill, rose an immense haze of diffused, pale light,
which gave the sky above it a dull reddish glow.
Nerzhin’s special chair, with its flexible back, his rolltop desk—something
not made in the Soviet Union—and his comfortable place by the south window
would have revealed him to anyone familiar with the history of the Marfino
sharashka as one of its founding members.
The sharashka had taken its name from what had once been the village of
Marfino but was now territory within the city limits. The sharashka had been
inaugurated some three years ago on a July evening. A dozen or so zeks,
summoned from the camps, were driven to what had once been a seminary, just
outside Moscow. The building had been fenced around with barbed wire in
readiness. That was remembered as an idyllic age: You could switch on the
BBC loud in the prisoners’ living quarters (no one yet knew how to jam it), you
could stroll about the “zone” in the evening without asking permission, you
could lie in the dewy grass, left uncut, contrary to regulations (it is supposed to
be cropped close so that you cannot crawl through it to the wire), and you
could observe the eternal stars or the perishable Sergeant Major Zhvakun on
night duty and all in a sweat, steal timber from a building under repair and
slide it under the barbed wire to take home for firewood.
The sharashka did not yet know what direction its research was to take and
occupied itself unpacking numerous crates, three trainloads of them from
Germany, staking claims to comfortable German chairs and desks, and sorting
out equipment for telecommunications, ultrashortwave radio, and acoustics.
Much of it was obsolete or had been damaged in transit. And the sharashka
gradually realized that the Germans had purloined or destroyed the best of the
equipment and the most recent documentation, while the MVD*
captain sent to
“relocate” the Lorenz factory, an expert on furniture but not on radio or the
German language, spent his time in and around Berlin searching out elegant
pieces for his own Moscow apartment and those of his superiors.
The grass had been mowed long ago, the doors now opened for the prisoners
to take exercise only when a bell rang, and the sharashka, transferred from
Beria’s to Abakumov’s jurisdiction, had been put to work on scrambler
telephones. They had hoped to complete the assignment within a year, but it
had dragged on for two years, expanding and becoming more and more
complicated as new lines of inquiry multiplied. On Rubin’s and Nerzhin’s
desks it had reduced itself to the problem of identifying voices on the
telephone, which meant determining what makes a person’s voice unique.
Apparently no one had done anything of the sort before. At any rate, they had
come across no relevant published work. They had been given six months to
complete their task, then another six, but they had still made little progress, and
the deadline was alarmingly close.
Uncomfortably aware as he was of this pressure, Rubin nonetheless
grumbled over his shoulder: “I somehow don’t feel a bit like working today.”
“You amaze me,” Nerzhin retorted. “A mere four years at the front and not
quite five in jail, am I right? And already you’re tired! Better put in for a
Crimean rest cure.”
They were silent for a while.
“Working on your own thing, aren’t you?” Rubin asked quietly.
“Uh-huh.”
“So who’s going to work on the voices?”
“To tell the truth, I was counting on you.”
“What a coincidence. I was counting on you.”
“You have no conscience. How many books have you checked out of the
Lenin Library, supposedly for this job? Speeches of famous lawyers. Koni’s
memoirs. Improve Your Acting. And to crown it all you brazenly called for a
work on Princess Turandot. Can any other zek in the Gulag boast of such a
varied collection of books?”
Rubin’s thick lips protruded, which always made him look stupid:
“Strange. With whom did I read all those books during working hours—
including the one about Princess Turandot? Could it have been you?”
“Well, I do want to work. I could lose myself completely in my work today
but for two little things. Number one, I’m agonizing over the parquet floors
question.”
“What parquet floors?”
“In the MVD house, on Kaluzhskaya Zastava, the semicircular building with
the tower. Our camp helped build it in ’45, and I was employed as a parquet
floor layer’s apprentice. I learned today that Roitman happens to live in that
very house. And I began to feel an artist’s pangs of conscience, or maybe I’m
just worried about my reputation. What I wonder is whether my floorboards
creak or not. If they do, it may mean that I did a slovenly job. And I’m
powerless to put it right!”
“D’you know, that would make a good play!”
“For a socialist-realist playwright. The second thing is: Isn’t it infuriating to
be working on Saturday evening when you know that only the free employees
get Sunday off?”
Rubin sighed. “The frees have already peeled off to various places of
entertainment. Making pigs of themselves.”
“But do they choose the right places of entertainment? Do they get more out
of life than we do? That’s a moot point.”
Prisoners, of necessity, learn to talk quietly, and even Serafima Vitalievna,
sitting opposite Nerzhin, was not supposed to hear them. They had both turned
their backs to the room and sat facing the window, the lights in the prison
grounds, the guard tower dimly discernible in the darkness, scattered lights in
distant greenhouses, and the whitish haze over Moscow.
Nerzhin was a mathematician but no stranger to linguistics, and ever since
the phonology of Russian speech had become the subject of the Marfino
sharashka’s research, he had been paired with Rubin, the only linguist in the
place. For two years they had sat together, back-to-back, twelve hours a day.
They had discovered at once that they had both fought at the same time first on
the northwestern front, then on the Belorussian front; both possessed the
“gentleman’s junior medal set”; both had been arrested in the same month by
the very same SMERSH**
; both of them had been charged under the
universally popular point Ten; and both had been given a “tenner” (not that this
made them different from anyone else). There was a slight age difference—six
years—and Nerzhin, a captain, was one step lower in rank.
Rubin was favorably disposed to Nerzhin because he had not been jailed as
a former prisoner of war and so was not infected with the anti-Soviet spirit of
“abroad.” Nerzhin was “one of us,” a Soviet man, only he had spent his whole
youth poring over books, reading himself silly, and had got it into his muddled
head that Stalin had distorted Leninism. No sooner had Nerzhin recorded this
conclusion on a scrap of paper than he was arrested. Shell-shocked by jail and
labor camp, Nerzhin had nonetheless remained at bottom “one of us,” and so
Rubin had the patience to listen to the confused and nonsensical thoughts that
were all he had for the time being.
They looked out into the darkness again.
Rubin made an impatient noise.
“You really are an intellectual pauper. It worries me.”
“I’m not competing. There’s a lot of cleverness in the world but not much
goodness.”
“Well, here’s a good book for you. Read it.”
“Another one about the poor bamboozled bulls?”
“No.”
“About stalking lions, then?”
“Certainly not.”
“I can’t make sense of people. What do I want with bulls?”
“You have to read it!”
“I don’t have to do anything! For anybody! For you or anybody else! Duties
duly discharged, as Spiridon says.”
“You pathetic person! It’s one of the best books of the twentieth century!”
“And will it really tell me what we all need to know? Where humanity went
wrong?”
“He’s a clever, goodhearted, infinitely honest writer—soldier, hunter,
fisherman, drunk, womanizer—coolly and sincerely contemptuous of all that’s
false, a stickler for simplicity, utterly humane, with the naïveté of genius. . . .”
“Spare me the rest!” Nerzhin said with a laugh. “You’ll give me an earache
with your spiel. I’ve lived for thirty years without Hemingway, and I expect to
go on a bit longer. My life’s in tatters anyway. I need to limit myself! Find my
own way. . . .”
He turned back toward his own desk.
Rubin sighed. He still did not feel like working.
He began studying a map of China propped up against a shelf at the back of
his desk. He had cut this map out of a newspaper and pasted it onto a piece of
cardboard. Throughout the past year, he had marked with a red pencil the
advance of the Communist forces, and now that their victory was complete, he
kept the map upright before him to cheer him at moments of weariness and
depression.
But today Rubin was in the grip of a sadness so acute that not even the
enormous red expanse of victorious China could overcome it.
Meanwhile Nerzhin, pausing now and then for a thoughtful suck at the sharp
tip of his plastic pen, was writing, in a script so minute that it looked more like
the work of a needle, on a tiny page lost in the camouflaging billows of learned
paper.
“The history of 1917 holds no surprises for a mathematician. A tangent
soaring at ninety degrees toward infinity at once plunges into the abyss of
minus infinity. In the same way, Russia, taking off for the first time toward a
freedom never before seen, immediately came to an abrupt stop and plunged
into the worst of tyrannies. No one has ever managed it at the first attempt.”
The big room of the Acoustics Laboratory was living its peaceful everyday
life. The electrician fitter’s little engine hummed. Orders were shouted:
“Switch on!” “Switch off!” The radio was dishing out the usual sentimental
pap. Somebody loudly demanded a “6-K-7” valve.
Taking advantage of moments when no one could see her, Serafima
Vitalievna looked intently at Nerzhin, who was still covering his scrap of
paper with writing like tiny embroidery.
Major Shikin, the security officer, had instructed her to keep an eye on this
prisoner.
* MVD: MVD, MGB, NKVD, GPU, and KGB, all of which are mentioned in
the present novel, are acronyms for the Soviet security agencies at different
periods and are successors to the Cheka, instituted by Lenin in 1917. More
alike than unlike, they represent the fundamental continuity of the system of
political police and intelligence services throughout the Soviet period.
** SMERSH: The acronym for SMERt SHpionam (Death to Spies), the Soviet
agency for military intelligence during World War II.