Chapter-88-The-Leading-Ideology

MONDAYWAS THE DAYAPPOINTED by the Central Committee of the Party for
political study, not just in the Marfino special prison but throughout the Soviet
Union. Every Monday schoolchildren in the top classes, housewives in housing
cooperatives, veterans of the Revolution, and gray-haired academicians sat at
desks from six to eight in the evening and unfolded the notes they had made on
Sunday. (It was the Leader’s adamant wish that citizens be required not only to
answer questions from memory but also to produce their own written synopses
of each lesson.)
Year after year, beginning on October 1, they studied in depth the errors of
the Populists, the errors of Plekhanov, and the struggle of Lenin and Stalin
against Economism, Legal Marxism, Opportunism, Tailism, Revisionism,
Anarchism, Recallism, Liquidationism, God-seeking, and Spineless
Intellectualism. They lavished time on the elucidation of Party statutes half a
century old (and long since superseded), on the difference between the old
Iskra and the new Iskra,
*
on “One Step Forward, Two Steps Back,” on
Bloody Sunday, and arrived at last at the famous chapter of the Short Course
in the History of the Communist Party that expounds the philosophical
foundations of Communist ideology—and that was where for some reason
every political study group got ingloriously stuck. Since this could not be
explained by flaws or muddle in Dialectical Materialism itself or by
obscurities in the author’s exposition (the chapter was written by Lenin’s Best
Pupil and Friend), there were only two possible reasons: the difficulties of
dialectical thinking for the backward and ignorant masses and the unstoppable
onset of spring. In May, when the battle with chapter 4 was at its hottest, the
toilers ransomed themselves by subscribing to the State Loan, and politics
classes were discontinued.
When the study circles reassembled in October, in spite of the explicit and
enduring wish of the Great Helmsman to move on quickly to the burning
questions of our own time, its deficiencies and determinant contradictions, they
had to reckon with the fact that the toilers had forgotten everything during the
summer and that chapter 4 was still waiting, and propagandists were told to
begin all over again with the errors of the Populists, the errors of Plekhanov,
the struggles with Economism and with Legal Marxism. . . .
So it went on, here, there, and everywhere, year in and year out. What made
today’s lecture at Marfino particularly important was that it was meant to finish
off chapter 4, touch on the genius Lenin’s dazzling Materialism and
Empiriocriticism, break out of the vicious circle, and at long last launch the
Marfino Party and Komsomol study groups along the high road of modernity,
beginning from “the work and struggle of our Party in the period of the First
Imperialist War and of Preparation for the February Revolution.”
A bonus for the free workers of Marfino was that summaries of set texts were
not expected on this occasion; those already written would keep till next
Monday.
There was a further inducement to attend; the lecturer was no common or
garden propagandist but Rakhmankul Shamsetdinov, who was on the staff of
the Oblast Party Committee. Stepanov had gone around the laboratories before
lunch to warn them that the lecturer was supposed to be hot stuff. (What
Stepanov did not know was that the lecturer was a close friend of Mamulov.
Not the Mamulov in Beria’s secretariat but his brother, commandant of the
camp attached to the Khovrin munitions factory. This Mamulov kept for his
personal enjoyment a serf theater, in which prisoners who had once been
Moscow artistes entertained him and his dinner guests, together with girls
handpicked from the Krasnaya Presnya transit prison. Because he was so close
to the Mamulovs, the Moscow Oblast Committee of the Party held the lecturer
in such esteem that he felt free to soar on the wings of inspiration instead of
reading from a prepared text.)
But in spite of the painstaking advance publicity for the lecture, the free
employees of Marfino seemed resistant to its magnetic pull and found pretexts
for lingering in their laboratories. One free worker was supposed to stay
behind in every department—prisoners could not be left unsupervised—so the
head of the Vacuum Laboratory, who never did anything, suddenly announced
that urgent business required his presence there and sent his two girls, Tamara
and Klara, to the lecture. Roitman’s deputy in the Acoustics Laboratory did the
same—stayed behind himself and ordered the girl on duty, Simochka, to go and
listen. Major Shikin also failed to turn up, but his activities were so shrouded
in secrecy that not even the Party could check up on him.
Those who did come arrived late and, out of a misguided sense of selfpreservation,
tried to find seats in the back rows.
A special room in the institute was reserved for meetings and lectures. A
large number of chairs had been installed, irremovably nailed onto poles, eight
at a time. (How else could the commandant deter people from carrying chairs
around the whole site?) It was not a large room, so there was little space
between rows, and knees were painfully jammed against the pole of the row in
front. Those who arrived early tried to move their rows back to make more
room for their legs. This provoked resistance, jokes, and laughter among the
younger people sitting in neighboring rows. Thanks to the exertions of
Stepanov and his whippers-in, all the rows were filled by 6:15 except the
second and third, where no one could sit, because they were wedged tightly
together and jammed against the front row.
“Comrades! Comrades! This is disgraceful!” Stepanov’s glasses had a
leaden glint as he urged on the laggards. “You are keeping an Oblast
Committee lecturer waiting!” (The lecturer, so as not to lose face, waited in
Stepanov’s office.)
Roitman was the next to last to enter the lecture room. Finding nowhere else
to sit—the whole place was occupied by green tunics, with here and there a
bright dress—he walked all the way to the front row and sat down on the
extreme left, with his knees almost touching the platform. Stepanov then went
to get Yakonov; he was not a Party member, but it was only right for him to be
present at such an important lecture, and anyway it should interest him.
Yakonov squeezed his way forward close to the wall, bending double to
squeeze his bulk past people who for the moment were not his subordinates but
the Party and Komsomol collective. Finding no vacant place farther back, he
sat down on the extreme right of the front row, so that he and Roitman were on
opposite sides yet again!
This done, Stepanov led in the lecturer. He was a big man with broad
shoulders, a large head, and an unruly mane of black hair flecked with gray. He
was completely relaxed, as though he had come into the room simply to drink a
mug of beer with Stepanov. He was wearing a light-colored worsted suit,
somewhat creased, and a variegated tie with a knot as big as a fist. There were
no exercise books or prompt sheets in his hands, and he got straight down to
business.
“Comrades! Each and every one of us is interested in the nature of the world
about us.”
Looming massively over his audience from behind the red-calico-covered
desk on the platform, he fell silent, and they all pricked up their ears. There
was a general feeling that he was about to explain it in a few words: the true
nature of the world about us. But the lecturer rocked back on his heels, as
though he had been given a whiff of smelling salts, and exclaimed indignantly:
“Many philosophers have endeavored to answer that question! But before
Marx no one was able to do so! Because metaphysics does not recognize
qualitative change! Of course, it is not easy”—with two fingers he plucked a
gold watch from his pocket—“not easy to make it all clear to you in an hour
and a half but”—putting away his watch—“I shall try.”
Stepanov, who had installed himself at the butt end of the lecturer’s desk,
interrupted: “Take longer if you like. Feel free!”
Some of the girls were in a hurry to get to the movies. Their hearts sank.
But the lecturer, spreading his arms in a dignified gesture, acknowledged that
he, too, was subject to higher authority.
“Let’s stick to the time limit!” he said, putting Stepanov in his place. “What
enabled Marx and Engels to give a correct picture of nature and society? The
inspired philosophical system they devised, subsequently further developed by
Lenin and Stalin, and known as dialectical materialism. The first major
component of dialectical materialism is the materialist dialectic. I shall briefly
describe its basic theses. The Prussian philosopher Hegel is usually said to
have been the first to formulate the basic features of the dialectic. But that,
Comrades, is radically—yes, radically—wrong! Hegel’s dialectic was
standing on its head—yes, on its head—that’s indisputable! Marx and Engels
set it on its feet, extracted its rational kernel, and threw away the idealistic
husk! The Marxist dialectical method—that is the enemy! The enemy of all that
is stagnant, all metaphysics, all superstition! And we distinguish, in all, four
features of the dialectic. The first feature is . . . is that which . . . is
interconnection! Interconnection, not an accumulation of isolated objects.
Nature and society are not—how can I put it? Not a furniture store, where lots
of things are on display, lots and lots of things, with no connection between
them. In nature, everything is connected, everything—just make a note of that,
and it will be a great help to you in your scientific investigations!”
Those who had not grudged an extra ten minutes but arrived early were
sitting at the back in a particularly advantageous position. The stern gleam of
Stepanov’s spectacles could not reach them. There, a tall lieutenant, smart as a
guardsman, wrote a note and passed it to Tonya, a Tatar girl from the Acoustics
Lab, also a lieutenant but wearing a bright red knitted pullover, imported, over
her dark dress. Tonya hid behind the man sitting in front and unfolded the note
on her knees. Her black forelock slipped and hung down, making her more
attractive than ever. She read the note, blushed slightly, and began asking her
neighbors for a pencil or fountain pen.
“. . . And the number of examples could be multiplied. . . . The second
feature of the dialectic is that all things are in motion. All things move, nothing
is or ever was at rest, and that is a fact! Science must study all things in
motion, in their development, but at the same time we must get it firmly into our
heads that motion does not take place in a closed circle; otherwise, the higher
form of life we have today would not have emerged. Movement goes up a
spiral staircase; that is self-evident, ever upward, ever upward, like this. . . .”
He showed them how, with a fluid wave of his hand; the lecturer’s
movements were as free and easy as his choice of words. Scattering the
superfluous chairs on the platform, he cleared a space of some three meters
square near the table, paced to and fro stamping his feet, and rocked backward
and forward, leaning on the back of a chair that threatened to collapse under
the pressure of his sturdy frame. “Indubitably” and “it goes without saying”
rang out with special emphasis, challenging contradiction, as if he were
standing on the captain’s bridge, quelling a mutiny; and he pronounced these
words not randomly but where arguments neat enough to begin with called for
still further reinforcement.
“The third feature of the dialectic is the transition of quantity into quality.
This very important feature helps us to understand what development is. You
must not think that development simply means enlargement. Here we must point
the finger at Darwin, above all. Engels explains this feature with examples
from science. Take water, the water in this carafe, say; its temperature is
eighteen degrees, and it is just water. But suppose you heat it. Heat it to thirty
degrees, and it will still be water. Heat it to eighty degrees, still water. But
what if you heat it to one hundred? What will it be then? Steam!”
The lecturer’s cry of triumph made some of his listeners jump.
“Steam! But you can also make ice! So, then. That’s what is meant by the
transition of quantity into quality! Read the Dialectics of Nature by Engels; it’s
full of other instructive examples, which will throw light on your day-to-day
difficulties. And now, we are told, our Soviet science has discovered that air,
too, can be liquefied. For some reason, nobody had even thought of that a
hundred years ago! Why? Because they didn’t know the law of transition of
quantity into quality. And so it is in all things, Comrades! I will give you some
examples from the development of society. . . .”
Adam Roitman did not need, had never needed, a lecturer to tell him that
diamat is as important to a scientist as air, that without it no one can make
sense of life’s phenomena. But at meetings, seminars, and lectures like this one,
Roitman felt as if his brain were slowly turning, twisted out of true. He tried to
resist but found himself succumbing to this hypnotic spin as an exhausted man
surrenders to sleep. He tried to shake off his drowsiness. He could have
spoken up and cited amazing examples from the structure of the atom, from
wave mechanics. But he would never presume to interrupt or upstage a
comrade from the Oblast Committee. His almond eyes simply stared
reproachfully through his anastigmatic spectacles as the lecturer’s gesticulating
arms narrowly missed his head.
The lecturer’s voice boomed on. “So, then, the transition of quantity into
quality may happen explosively, and it may happen e-vol-ution-ar-ily; that is a
fact! Development does not of necessity and everywhere require an explosion.
Our socialist society is developing and will go on developing without
explosions; that is indisputable! But social renegades, social traitors, rightwing
socialists of every stripe shamelessly try to deceive the people, telling
them that the transition from capitalism to socialism is possible without an
explosion. Meaning what? Meaning without revolution? Without smashing the
state machine? By the parliamentary path? Let them tell their fairy tales to little
children, not to grown-up Marxists! Lenin taught us, and another theoretician of
genius, Comrade Stalin, teaches us that the bourgeoisie will never give up
power without armed struggle!”
The lecturer’s shaggy locks jiggled when he tossed his head. He blew his
nose into a big azure-bordered handkerchief and looked at his watch, not with
the imploring gaze of a lecturer running out of time but doubtfully,
uncomprehendingly, after which he held it to his ear.
“The fourth feature of the dialectic,” he shouted, loudly enough to startle
people all over again, “is that, which . . . is contradictions! Antitheses! The
moribund and the new, negative and positive! It’s . . . it’s everywhere,
Comrades; it’s no secret! One can give scientific examples—electricity, say! If
you rub glass on silk, that will be positive; but pitch against fur, that’s negative!
But only their unity, their synthesis gives energy for our industry. And you don’t
have to look far for examples, Comrade; they are here, there, and everywhere.
Heat is positive, while cold is negative, and in society we see the same
irreconcilable conflict between positive and negative. As you see, diamat has
absorbed all the best achievements of every branch of science. The hidden
internal contradictions of development laid bare by the Founding Fathers of
Marxism not only were found in dead nature but were seen to be the
fundamental motive force of all social formations from primitive communism
to the imperialism now rotting before our very eyes! And only in our classless
society is the moving force inarguably not internal contradictions but criticism
and self-criticism without respect of persons.”
The lecturer yawned and did not cover his mouth in time. Suddenly, he
looked dejected; vertical lines appeared in his face; his lower jaw trembled in
a suppressed convulsion. Struggling to remain on his feet, he spoke now in
different, utterly weary tones.
“Oppositionists and defeatists of the Bukharinist persuasion grossly
slandered us, claiming that we had class contradictions here . . . but. . . .”
Fatigue felled him. He blinked, slumped onto his chair, and finished his
sentence in a feeble whisper: “. . . but they met with a crushing defeat at the
hands of our Central Committee.”
He went on to read the whole middle part of his lecture in the same manner.
It was as if an insidious disease had suddenly sapped his strength, or as if he
had lost all hope that this accursed ninety minutes of lecturing would ever end.
He was a man lost in a maze, despairing of ever finding a way out.
“Matter alone is absolute, while all the laws of science are relative. . . .
Only matter is absolute, while every particular form of matter is relative. . . .
Noth-thing is absolute except matter, and motion is its eternal attribute. . . .
Motion is absolute; repose is relative. There are no absolute truths; all truths
are relative. . . . The idea of beauty is relative. Ideas of good and evil are
relative. . . .”
Whether Stepanov was listening or not, his whole demeanor—sitting bolt
upright, flashing glances at the auditorium—expressed his awareness that a
political occasion of great moment was in progress and his modest pride that
such an event should take place within the walls of Marfino.
Yakonov and Roitman were forced to listen to the lecturer because they were
sitting so near. And one girl in the fourth row, wearing a cheap cotton dress,
listened on the edge of her seat and was slightly flushed. She wanted to show
off by asking the lecturer something but couldn’t think what.
Klykachev was also watching the lecturer closely, his long, narrow head
protruding from the uniformed throng. But he, too, was not listening. He
conducted political education classes himself, could have given an even better
lecture, and knew very well what teaching aids had provided the material for
today’s performance. Klykachev was studying the lecturer out of sheer
boredom, calculating how much he was paid per month, then trying to
determine his age and lifestyle. He was possibly about forty, but his ashen
complexion, his hollow cheeks, and his spongy, purple nose made him look
over fifty—or perhaps he was getting a good deal out of life, and life was
taking its revenge.
The rest of them did not even pretend to be listening. Tonya and the
handsome lieutenant had used up four pages of their scribbling pads in an
exchange of notes, while another lieutenant was playing an absorbing game
with Tamara: He would take her first by one finger, then by another, then by her
whole hand; she would give him a little slap with her other hand and free
herself; and then it began all over again. They were absorbed in their game;
but, like crafty schoolchildren, they did their best to look serious—their faces
were all Stepanov could see of them. The head of Fourth Group was making a
sketch (on his knees, where Stepanov could not see it) for the head of First
Group of an extension he thought of making to a circuit, already in operation.
Still, the lecturer’s voice reached all of them in snatches. But Klara
Makarygina, in a bright blue dress, had boldly planted her elbows on the back
of the chair in front of her and, deaf and blind to all that was happening in that
room, was wandering in that rose pink haze that is sometimes seen behind
tight-shut eyelids. Mixed feelings of joy, embarrassment, and sadness had
haunted her ever since Rostislav had kissed her. It was all such a hopeless
tangle. Why had Erik entered her life? How could she slight him? How could
she possibly “not wait” for Ruska now? But how could she “wait” for him?
And how could she remain in the same group with him, meet his gaze, and go
on talking where they had left off? Should she transfer to another group?
Perhaps the engineer colonel had decided to transfer Rostislav? It was two
hours since he had been summoned, and he had still not returned. She had
hurried off to the politics class, glad that she could put off their meeting. As he
left the room, he had turned around in the doorway and given her an unbearably
reproachful look. It must indeed have looked like a shabby trick, making
promises yesterday, then today. . . .
(She did not know that they were never to meet again. Ruska had been
arrested and taken away to a tight little box of a cell in the prison headquarters.
While back in the Vacuum Laboratory, in the presence of its head, Major Shikin
was at that very moment breaking into and searching Ruska’s desk.)
The lecturer had revived. He rose to his feet and, brandishing his big fist,
demolished with ease the gimcrack formal logic created by Aristotle and the
medieval scholastics, which now felt the full force of Marxist dialectic.
Marfino, by exception, received current American journals, and Rubin had
recently translated for the Acoustics Laboratory at large an article that Roitman
and several other officers had read on the new science of cybernetics. It was
based on precisely those thrice-obsolete procedures of formal logic: “Yes”
means yes, “no” means no, and Tertium non datur. (John Bull’s Two-Digit
Algebraic Logic had appeared in the same year as the Communist Manifesto,
only nobody had noticed it.)
“The second main section of dialectical materialism is philosophical
materialism,” the lecturer thundered. “Materialism grew up in the struggle with
the reactionary philosophy of idealism, of which Plato was the founder, and its
most typical representatives subsequently were Bishop Berkeley, Mach,
Avenarius, Yushkevich, and Valentinov.”
Yakonov groaned so loudly that people turned to look at him. Whereupon he
pulled a face and clutched his side. Roitman was perhaps the one person there
with whom he could share his thoughts but also the last he could confide in. So
he sat looking humbly attentive. To think that he had to waste on this the “one
last month” for which he had begged!
“That matter is the substance of all that exists needs no proof!” the lecturer
thundered. “Matter is indestructible; that is not open to dispute! And that, too,
can be scientifically proved. Suppose, for instance, we plant a grain of corn in
the ground; does that mean that it has vanished? No! It turns into a plant, into a
dozen such grains. Take water, for instance. Say it has evaporated in the sun.
Has that water vanished? Of course not! That water has turned into cloud, into
steam! That’s all! Only that base lackey of the bourgeoisie, that certificated
hireling of religious obscurantism, the physicist Ostwald, has had the
barefaced nerve to declare that “matter has disappeared.” That is ridiculous,
as anybody can see! The genius Lenin, in his immortal work Materialism and
Empiriocriticism, guided by his progressive worldview, refuted Ostwald and
drove him into such a blind alley that he didn’t know where to turn!”
Yakonov thought: It would be good to drive a hundred lecturers like this one
onto these close-packed chairs, give them a lecture on Einstein’s theory, and
make them go without dinner until they get their stupid, lazy heads around just
one little problem: Where, say, do four million tons of solar substance vanish
to in a single second?
But he had been made to miss his own dinner, and he ached all over. Only the
hope that release would not be long delayed kept him going.
They all fortified themselves with the same hope: They had left home by
trolley, bus, or electric train at 8:00, or some of them as early as 7:00, that
morning, and they could not now expect to get home before 9:30.
One person looked forward to the end of the lecture even more eagerly than
the others: Simochka, although she would be staying behind on duty, not
hurrying home. Hot waves of fear and anticipation left her legs as unsteady as
if she had drunk champagne. This was the very Monday evening on which she
had arranged to meet Gleb. This was to be the most solemn, the supreme
moment of her life. It must not be bungled or trivialized. That was why she had
not felt ready for it the day before yesterday. She had spent all day yesterday
and half of today as if preparing for a great holiday. She had sat with the
dressmaker, urging her to hurry with the new dress, which was so becoming.
At home, she had placed the tin basin on the floor of that cramped Moscow
room and washed herself thoroughly. At bedtime she had painstakingly put her
hair in curlers, and the next morning had spent just as long uncurling it, viewing
herself in the mirror from all angles, trying to reassure herself that she would
look attractive if she turned her head some other way.
She should have seen Nerzhin at 3:00 in the afternoon, immediately after the
lunch break, but he habitually disregarded the rules for prisoners (must scold
him for it today! he must be more careful!) and was late getting back from
lunch. In the meantime, Simochka had been sent to another group to take
delivery of apparatus and components, and it was nearly 6:00 when she got
back to the Acoustics Laboratory, missing Gleb yet again, although his desk
was littered with journals and folders and his lamp was on. So she had left for
the lecture without seeing him, unaware of the terrible news—that after a
twelve-month interval he had been visited by his wife the day before.
Now she was sitting in the lecture room in her new dress, with burning
cheeks, apprehensively watching the hands of the big electric clock. Shortly
after 8:00 she and Gleb should have been alone together. Simochka was so
small that she fitted in easily between the cramped rows, and from a distance
her chair appeared to be unoccupied.
The lecturer’s pace was perceptibly accelerating, rather as an orchestra
picks up speed in the final bars of a waltz or polka. They all sensed it and
cheered up. Winged thoughts chased one another, foam flecked, over the heads
of his listeners.
“Theory becomes a material force. . . . The three characteristics of
materialism . . . the two special features of production . . . the five types of
producer relations . . . transition to socialism impossible without the
dictatorship of the proletariat . . . the leap into the realm of freedom . . .
bourgeois sociologists understand all this very well . . . the force and vitality
of Marxism-Leninism . . . Comrade Stalin has raised dialectical materialism to
a new, still higher level! What Lenin had no time to do in matters of theory,
Comrade Stalin has done! . . . victory in the Great Fatherland War . . . inspiring
results . . . immense prospects . . . the wisdom and genius of our . . . our great
. . . our beloved. . . .”
And now, to applause, he was looking at his pocket watch. It was 7:45. Still
a smidgen short of the prescribed time.
“Perhaps some of you have questions?” the lecturer said half threateningly.
“Yes, if I may. . . .” The girl in the cotton dress called out from the fourth
row, blushing furiously. She rose, uncomfortably aware that everyone was
looking and listening, and asked, “You say that bourgeois sociologists are well
aware of all this. And it is, indeed, all so clear, so convincing. So why do they
write the opposite in their books? Does it mean that they deliberately seek to
deceive people?”
“It’s because it wouldn’t pay them to say anything else! They get a lot of
money for it! They are bribed with the superprofits squeezed out of the
colonies! Their doctrine is called pragmatism, which means, translated into
Russian, ‘What’s profitable is permissible.’ They are all frauds, political
prostitutes.”
“Every single one?” the girl asked in a voice shrill with horror.
“Every single one,” the lecturer said firmly, tossing his graying mane.
* Iskra: The newspaper established in 1900 by Russian socialists abroad and
initially managed by Lenin but seized by Mensheviks in 1903 and controlled by
Georgy Plekhanov until the paper’s demise in 1905, The Russian title means
Spark.