Chapter-77-The-Decision-Taken

CHOPPING WOOD IN THE FRESH MORNING AIR, Sologdin reviewed his
decision of the night before. Ideas unchallenged by a sleepy mind cannot
always stand the light of day.
He had lost count of the logs he had chopped, forgotten that he was swinging
an ax. He was thinking.
But the inconclusive debate with Rubin prevented him from thinking clearly.
Arguments that would have floored Lev last night crowded his mind now that it
was too late.
But what vexed him, what galled him most, was the absurd turn the debate
had taken; it was as if Rubin had won the right to judge Sologdin’s behavior
and in particular the step he must take today. He could delete Lyovka Rubin’s
name from the scroll of friendship but could not strike out the challenge he had
delivered. It lingered . . . and it rankled. It threatened to rob Sologdin of credit
for his invention.
Yet, on the whole, the debate had been well worthwhile, as debate always is.
Praise opens a safety valve, reduces internal tension, and so is always harmful
to us. Whereas abuse, however unfair, serves as much-needed fuel for a man’s
boiler.
All things in their prime have, of course, a hunger for life. Dmitri Sologdin,
with his exceptional abilities, physical and mental, had a right to his harvest,
his share of life’s blessings. But he himself had said only yesterday that noble
ends are attainable only by noble means.
Sologdin had greeted that morning’s announcement from the prison
administration with a broad smile. It was yet another proof of his foresight. He
himself had decided to break off his correspondence with his wife, and in good
time. She would not be plagued by uncertainty.
The hardening of the prison regime was simply the latest of many warnings
that the whole situation would become grimmer and grimmer and that no one
would ever walk free just because he had “done his time.”
The only way out was to earn remission.
When the prisoners thronged the stairs at 9:00 a.m., Sologdin was among the
first. He went up to the design office, bold and bursting with health, fingering
his blond beard (“Here comes Count Sologdin”).
His triumphantly shining eyes met Larisa’s eager gaze.
She had been yearning for him all night! What joy it was to have the right to
sit by him and admire him. Perhaps exchange a note with him.
It was not the moment for that. Sologdin averted his eyes as he bowed
politely and immediately gave Yemina some work to do; she had to run down
to the engineering shops and find out how many of the bolts specified in order
114 had been run off so far. And would she please be quick about it.
Larisa looked at him, puzzled and anxious. She left the room.
The gray morning gave so little light that overhead lamps were burning and
drawing-board lamps lit up one after another.
Solodgin unpinned the dirty sheet of paper covering his drawing board, and
the main circuit of his encoder met his eyes.
Two years of his life had gone into this work. Two years of strict intellectual
discipline. Two years of the most productive morning hours; nothing great is
created later in the day.
Had it all been for nothing?
But should a man love such a bad country? This people estranged from God,
a people that had committed so many crimes and shown no sign of remorse—
was this nation of slaves worthy of sacrificial victims, geniuses who had laid
their heads on the block unknown and unsung? For a hundred, for two hundred
years to come, this people would be content with its trough. Should the
torchbearers of human thought be sacrificed for them?
Was it not more important to preserve and hand on the torch? You could deal
a still heavier blow later.
He stood poring over his creation.
He had only a few hours, perhaps only a few minutes, to solve the greatest
problem he would ever face.
He unpinned the main sheet. It flapped down like the sail of a frigate.
One of the office girls was, as usual on Mondays, making the rounds of the
designers collecting unwanted drawings for destruction. Discarded sheets
were not to be torn up and thrown in refuse bins but burned out in the yard after
official authorization.
(Was it lax of Major Shikin to put his trust in fire? Surely, a Design Office
Security Operations Office should have been set up alongside the design office
to monitor all drawings sent by the latter for destruction?)
Sologdin picked up a soft copying pencil, drew several bold lines through
his sketch, and scribbled over it.
Then he unpinned it, tore a strip off it, laid the dirty cover sheet over it,
slipped another piece of wastepaper underneath, screwed the whole lot up, and
handed it to the girl.
“Here you are, three sheets.”
Then he sat down and pretended to be consulting a reference book while he
kept half an eye on what became of his drawing. He wanted to see whether one
of the other designers would come to look through the discarded sheets.
But suddenly it was conference time. They all gathered around and sat down.
The lieutenant colonel in charge of the design office remained seated and
spoke perfunctorily about plan fulfillment, new plans, and reciprocal socialist
obligations. He had included in the plan, without believing it for a minute, a
promise to produce a technically sound design for an encoding machine by the
end of the year and was now qualifying this so as to allow his designers
loopholes for a possible retreat.
Sologdin sat in the back row serenely gazing past all those heads at the wall
beyond. His face was smooth and unclouded, and no one would have supposed
that he had something on his mind. He seemed simply to be using the meeting
as an opportunity to take a rest.
In reality, he was thinking furiously.
Suddenly he was stunned by the most obvious of misgivings: Maybe they’d
been watching him closely since yesterday, when Anton had set eyes on that
piece of paper? Perhaps the girls would be relieved of his encoder as soon as
they got through the door with it?
He writhed like a man impaled. He sat impatiently through the meeting and
hurried over to the girls. They were already drawing up the list for signature.
“I gave you one sheet by mistake,” he said. “Sorry. Here it is. This one.”
He carried it to his workplace and laid it facedown on his desk. Larisa was
not there; nobody could see him. He took a large pair of scissors and quickly
cut the drawing into two uneven pieces, then into four, then cut each of the
quarters into four again.
That would be safest. Another oversight on the part of Major Shikin. He
should have made them do their drawings in books with numbered and stamped
pages. Facing the corner with his back to the room, Sologdin stuffed all sixteen
scraps of paper into the bosom of his baggy overalls.
He always kept a box of matches in his desk.
He left the design office, looking preoccupied, and turned from the main
hallway into a side passage that led to the bathroom.
The zek washing his hands under the tap in the first room was Tyunyukin, a
notorious stoolie. To the rear were the urinals and four stalls. The first was
locked (Sologdin tried the door), the two middle ones half-open and
unoccupied. The fourth door was closed, but it yielded to his hand. It had a
good bolt.
Sologdin stepped inside, locked the door, and stood stock-still.
He took two pieces of paper from under his overalls, got his box of Victory
matches out, and waited. He could not strike a match yet, in case someone saw
the flame reflected by the ceiling or smelled fumes spreading through the
bathroom.
Somebody else came in. Then both he and the occupant of the first stall went
out. Sologdin struck his match. The phosphorus flared up and shot onto his
chest. At his second try the flame was too weak to get a hold on the twisted
brown body of the match. It sputtered and went out in a miserable wisp of
smoke.
Sologdin silently mouthed a few popular prison-camp oaths. Nonflammable,
incombustible matches! What other country could produce them? If you set out
to make them, you couldn’t! “Victory”! What victory could they ever have
won?
The third match snapped between his fingers. The fourth was already broken
when he took it from the box. The fifth had no phosphorus on the sides of the
head.
Sologdin frantically pried out several matches and struck the whole bunch at
once. They lit. He held the paper to the flame. The thick drawing paper did not
burn readily. Sologdin turned it so that the flame was at the bottom. It flared up
and began to burn his fingers. He carefully placed the burning sheets in the
toilet bowl, away from the water. Then took out a second batch and lit it from
the first, adjusting those so that they would burn completely. The black ash
curled up and floated on the water like a little boat.
The second batch was ablaze by now. Sologdin let go of it and put more
sheets, then yet more, on top of it. The new bits smothered the flame, and
pungent smoke rose from the smoldering mass.
At that moment somebody came in and shut himself up in the stall two over.
While the smoke was still rising!
It could be a friend.
It could equally well be an enemy.
Perhaps the smoke would not get that far. But perhaps the other man had
already noticed the smell of burning and was about to give the alarm.
There was a tickling in Sologdin’s throat, but he suppressed his cough.
Then suddenly the whole mass of paper flared up and a shaft of yellow light
struck the ceiling. The heat of the flame was intense. It dried the sides of the
toilet bowl and seemed likely to crack them.
There were still two small pieces left, but Sologdin did not put them into the
bowl. The fire was burning out. He flushed the toilet noisily. The water
compressed the heap of black ash and carried it away.
Sologdin waited, motionless.
Two other people came in just for a chat.
“All he thinks of is getting to heaven on somebody else’s back.”
“Just check it on the oscillograph, and never mind the rest.”
They left, but someone else immediately arrived and locked himself in.
Sologdin stood there, humiliated by having to hide. He suddenly realized
what was on the last scraps of paper. One was a corner piece, showing just the
very edge of his drawing. Tearing off the bit that mattered, Sologdin threw the
rest into the wastebasket. But the other piece contained the very heart of his
design. He began very patiently tearing it into pieces so small that he could
scarcely hold them between his fingernails.
He flushed the toilet again and dashed out to the hallway under cover of the
noise.
Nobody had noticed him.
Once in the main hallway, he slowed down. A wry thought occurred to him;
you set fire to the ship of hope, and all you feel is fear that a toilet bowl may
crack or that somebody may notice a smell of burning.
He went back into the design office, listened absently to Yemina’s news from
the engineering shop, and asked her to hurry up with the copying.
She didn’t understand.
How could she?
He himself didn’t understand yet. There was so much that was still unclear to
him. Oblivious to the need to “look busy,” Sologdin did not touch his
instrument case, his books, or his drawings. He sat with his head in his hands,
eyes open but unseeing.
Any minute now someone would come and summon him to the engineer
colonel’s office.
He was in fact summoned, but to the lieutenant colonel.
A complaint had arrived from the filter laboratory that they still hadn’t
received the drawing (of two brackets) they had ordered. The lieutenant
colonel was not a harsh man. He only frowned and said, “Dmitri
Aleksandrovich, surely it can’t be as complicated as all that? It was ordered
on Thursday!”
Sologdin pulled himself together. “I’m sorry. I’ve nearly finished them.
They’ll be ready in an hour.”
He hadn’t even begun, but it wouldn’t do to admit that there had never been
more than an hour’s work in it.