Chapter-40-A-Rendezvous

THERE HAD BEEN TEARS while she was waiting, but Nadya went in to meet
him joyfully.
When she appeared in the doorway, Gleb was already on his feet and smiling
a greeting. His smile lasted while he took one step toward her and she one step
toward him, but it filled her with exultant happiness; she saw that he was as
close to her as ever! He had not changed toward her!
The bull-necked ex-gangster in the soft gray suit approached the little table
and barred the way across the little room, preventing them from coming
together.
“Let me at least touch her hand!” Nerzhin said indignantly.
“It’s not allowed.” The guard lowered his heavy jaw a fraction of an inch to
emit the words.
Nadya’s smile did not hide her dismay, but she signaled to her husband not to
argue. She sank onto the chair placed ready for her. The stuffing was escaping
from the leather upholstery in places. Generations of interrogators, who had
sent hundreds of people to their graves and shortly followed them, had taken
their turns on that chair.
“Happy birthday,” said Nadya, trying to look cheerful.
“Thank you.”
“What a coincidence. Us meeting today.”
“Must be my lucky day.”
Talking was proving difficult.
Nadya made an effort not to feel the guard’s eyes upon her and his
oppressive presence. Gleb was trying to sit so that the rickety stool would not
cause him pain.
A small table across which prisoners faced their interrogators stood between
husband and wife.
“In case I forget. I’ve brought you a bite to eat. Some of those straws like
mother makes, remember? I’m sorry that’s all it is.”
“Silly girl, you shouldn’t have bothered! We get everything we need.”
“I don’t suppose you get pastry straws? And you told me not to bring books.
. . . Do you read your Yesenin?”
Nerzhin’s face clouded over. It was more than a month since somebody had
informed on him, and Shikin had taken the book away, saying that Yesenin was
forbidden.
“Yes, I do.”
(They had only half an hour; he really couldn’t go into details.)
The room wasn’t at all hot; in fact, it seemed to be unheated. But Nadya
unbuttoned her collar and turned it down; she wanted her husband to see not
only her new coat, made that year, which for some reason he hadn’t mentioned,
but her new blouse, too, and she thought that the blouse might lend a little color
to her face, which must look sallow in that dim light.
With a single glance Gleb took in her face, her throat, her open-necked
blouse. That look was the most important moment of the visit, and Nadya
stirred as though offering herself to it eagerly.
“You’ve got a new blouse. Let’s see a bit more of it.”
She looked a little hurt. “What about the coat?”
“What about it?”
“The coat’s new, too.”
Gleb caught on at last.
“So it is. You’ve got a new coat.” He ran his eyes over the black curls, not
knowing that it was astrakhan, let alone whether it was real or artificial. No
man on earth was less capable of distinguishing a five-hundred-ruble coat from
one worth five thousand.
She threw the coat open, and he saw her neck, as smooth and girlish as ever,
her weak slender shoulders, and, under the gathers of her blouse, her breasts,
which had sagged miserably in all those years.
Mentally he reproached her for living a life in which new finery and new
friends were a matter of course, but when he saw her pathetically sunken
bosom, this fleeting thought gave way to pity. Her life, like his, had been
crushed beneath the wheels of the gray prison truck.
“You’re a bit thin,” he said compassionately. “You must eat more. Can’t you
eat better?”
Am I so ugly then? her eyes asked.
You’re as wonderful as ever, her husband’s eyes answered.
(Although the lieutenant colonel had not prohibited these words, it was
impossible to say them with a third person present.)
“I eat a lot,” she said untruthfully, “but I’m always in a rush, and I’ve got a
lot to worry about.”
“Tell me about it.”
“No, you first.”
“Never mind me,” Gleb said, smiling. “I’m all right.”
“Well, then. . . .” She was embarrassed.
The guard was standing half a meter from the table, a solid bulldog of a man,
staring down at husband and wife as fixedly and contemptuously as stone lions
at the doors of great houses look upon passersby.
They had to find a safe tone, a language of eloquent hints that this man,
obviously intellectually inferior, would not understand.
She changed the subject abruptly.
“Is that your own suit?”
“Mine? It’s like a Potemkin village. Strictly temporary. For three hours only.
Don’t let the Sphinx put you off.”
“I can’t help it,” she said plaintively, pouting like a little girl, sure now that
her husband still found her attractive.
“We’re used to seeing the funny side of it.”
“Yes, but we aren’t,” Nadya said with a sigh, remembering her conversation
with Gerasimovich’s wife. Nerzhin tried to trap his wife’s knees between his
own, but even this contact was hindered by an awkward crossbar attached to
the table at just the right height to prevent a prisoner under investigation from
stretching his legs. The table wobbled. Supporting himself on his elbows and
leaning closer to his wife, Gleb said with annoyance: “That’s how it is—
obstacles everywhere.”
His look said, Are you mine? Truly mine?
Her gray eyes shone, telling him, I’m still the girl you loved. I’m just as I
was. Please believe me!
“What about obstacles at work? Tell me about it. You say you aren’t
registered as a graduate student anymore?”
“No.”
“Has your thesis been examined?”
“No again.”
“Why ever not?”
“I’ll tell you.”
She began speaking very rapidly, afraid that they might not have much time
left.
“Nobody presents a thesis in three years. They’re given extensions. One girl
spent two years writing a thesis on ‘Problems of Public Catering’; then they
made her change her subject.”
(Why tell him this? It was of no importance at all.)
“My thesis is finished and typed, but I’m held up by the need to rework a few
passages. . . .”
(Held up by the “struggle against subservience to the bourgeois West,” but
this wasn’t the place to go into that!)
“. . . and then there are photocopies to be made. And I don’t know what to do
about the binding. I’ve got plenty to worry about.”
“But do they pay your grant?”
“No.”
“So what are you living on?”
“My wages.”
“Oh, you’re working. Where?”
“Right there in the university.”
“What sort of job?”
“It’s just temporary. I’m an invisible helper, if you know what I mean. In
general, I live from hand to mouth really. It’s the same with the dormitory. I
shouldn’t really. . . .”
She glanced at the guard. She was going to say that the police should long
ago have canceled her permit to live at Stromynka Street but quite by mistake
had extended it for six months. She might be found out any day! All the more
reason not to talk about it in the presence of an MGB sergeant.
“I only got this visit today because . . . it just so happened that. . . .” (Oh
dear, half an hour wasn’t long enough!)
“Wait a bit, you can tell me that later. What I wanted to ask was, are there
any obstacles because of me?”
“Very serious ones, my dear. . . . They’re giving me. . . . They want to give
me a special topic. I’m doing my best to avoid it.”
“What do you mean, a special topic?”
She sighed and glanced at the guard. His face, like that of a guard dog ready
to bark or bite her head off at any moment, was suspended less than a meter
from their faces.
Nadya made a helpless gesture. She would have had to explain that even in
the university there were now practically no research topics without a security
classification. The whole of science was being labeled secret from top to
bottom. What this meant for Nadya was a new, more detailed questionnaire
about her husband, her husband’s relatives, and the relatives of those relatives.
If she put down “husband convicted under Article 58,” they would not let her
present her thesis, let alone work at the university. If she lied—“husband
reported missing on active service”—she would still have to give his name;
they could look it up in the card index at the Ministry of the Interior, and she
would be prosecuted for giving false information. Nadya had chosen a third
solution, but she was reluctant to talk about it with Gleb’s watchful eyes on
her, and took refuge in animated chatter.
“Listen, I’m in an amateur concert party at the university. They send me to
play in concerts all the time. Not long ago I even played in the Hall of Columns
on the same evening as Yakov Zak.”
Gleb smiled and shook his head as though he found it hard to believe.
“Well, it was a Trade Union evening, and it just happened that way . . . but
still. And do you know, it was really funny they said my best dress was no
good; I couldn’t go on the platform in that. So they rang the theater and got
another one sent, a lovely one, down to my heels.”
“And when you’d played your piece, they took it off you?”
“Well. . . . Anyway, the girls say rude things about me because I’m mad about
music, but I say it’s better to be mad about something than somebody.”
This wasn’t just idle talk. She said it loud and clear. It was a clever way of
letting him know the new rules she had made for herself. She leaned forward
as though she expected a pat on the head.
Nerzhin looked at his wife, gratefully and anxiously. But for the moment he
couldn’t find the words of praise and approval she expected.
“But what about the special topic?”
Nadya lowered her eyes and hung her head.
“I was going to tell you. . . . But you won’t take it to heart—nicht wahr? You
once insisted that we should . . . get a divorce. . . .” Her last words were very
quiet.
(This was the third possibility, the only one that promised her some chance
of making a life for herself: Her dossier must contain not the word “divorced,”
because she would still have to give her ex-husband’s name, his present
address, the names of his parents, and even their birth dates, occupations, and
address; no, it must say “unmarried.” And for this she would have to get a
divorce in another town and keep it quiet.)
Yes, he had once insisted on it. . . . But now he was of two minds. Only now
did he notice that the wedding ring she had never been without was not on her
finger.
“Yes, of course,” he said very firmly.
Nadya rubbed the table with the palm of that same ringless hand, as though
she was rolling stiff dough into a flat cake.
“Well then . . . would you object . . . if I have to do it?” She raised her head.
Her eyes were wide. The pinpoints of her gray pupils implored him to
understand and forgive. “It would be a sham,” she added, in a single, almost
inaudible breath.
“Good for you! It’s about time!” Gleb agreed emphatically. In his heart he
was far less positive, but he was putting off any attempt to make sense of it all
until the visit was over.
“I may not have to do it!” she said, still pleading with him. She pulled her
coat back over her shoulders, and at that moment she looked care-worn and
exhausted.
“I wanted to know whether you agree, just in case. It may not be necessary.”
“No, you’re right, of course, it’s a good idea,” Gleb said mechanically. His
mind was already on the main point he had written down on his list, and which
it was now time to spring on her.
“It is important for you to be clear about things, my dear. You mustn’t bank on
my release when my sentence is over.”
He himself was fully prepared for a second sentence and an indefinite term
in jail. It had already happened to many of his comrades. This was something
he couldn’t put in a letter, and he had to speak out now.
Nadya looked apprehensive.
“The sentence you’re given is nominal,” Gleb said in a quick hard voice,
misplacing the stresses on words so that the guard wouldn’t keep up with him.
“It can escalate in a spiral. History provides a wealth of examples. And if by
some miracle my sentence does come to an end, you mustn’t think that we can
return to our own town and our old life. You must realize, get it firmly into
your head; you can’t buy a ticket to the land of the past. What I most regret, for
instance, is that I’m not a shoemaker. How badly needed that sort of thing is in
a settlement out in the taiga, in Krasnoyarsk, say, or on the lower reaches of the
Angara! That’s the sort of life we ought to prepare ourselves for!”
He had achieved his end. The retired gangster did not stir. He could only
blink as the sentences sped past him.
But Gleb had forgotten, or rather failed to understand (as they all did), that
those who are used to walking on warm gray earth cannot be expected to scale
icy mountains at short notice. He did not realize that his wife went on, as she
always had, methodically, meticulously counting the days and weeks of his
sentence. For him his term was a bright, cold infinity; for her there remained
264 weeks, 61 months, a little over 5 years—a much shorter time than had
passed since he went to the war from which he would not return.
As Gleb went on, the fear in Nadya’s face turned to ashen terror.
Her words tumbled over one another. “No, no, no! Don’t tell me that, my
dearest!” (She had forgotten all about the guard and her inhibitions.) “Don’t
take away my hope! I refuse to believe it! I mustn’t believe it! It simply can’t
be like that! You didn’t think, surely, that I would really leave you?”
Her upper lip quivered; her face was contorted; her eyes expressed nothing
but devotion, endless devotion.
“I do believe you, I do, my little Nadya!” Gleb said in a different voice.
“That’s what I thought.”
She sank back in her chair and was silent.
The sprightly, dark-haired lieutenant colonel appeared in the doorway, cast a
sharp eye on the three heads so confidentially close, and quietly called the
guard aside.
The bull-necked gangster moved reluctantly, as though he were being
dragged away from a delicious dessert, and went over to the lieutenant
colonel. They were only four steps behind Nadya’s back and exchanged only a
sentence or two, but Gleb had time to ask in a muffled voice: “Do you know
Sologdin’s wife?”
Nadya had plenty of practice and was not left behind by this sudden switch.
“Yes.”
“Know where she lives?”
“Yes.”
“They won’t allow him a visit. Tell her he—”
The gangster was back.
“Loves! Worships! Adores!” Gleb said, in his presence, speaking very
distinctly. Precisely because the gangster was there, Sologdin’s words
somehow did not sound too extravagant.
“Loves—worships—adores,” Nadya repeated with a sad sigh. She looked
closely at her husband. She had scrutinized him in the past as closely as only a
woman can, though because of her youth she might have missed something; she
had thought that she knew him, but she saw now a new man, a man she did not
know.
She nodded her head sadly. “It . . . suits you.”
“What does?”
“You know. This place. All this. Being here,” she said, slightly varying her
tone of voice to disguise her meaning—“being in prison suits him!”—from the
guard.
But seeing him in a new light brought him no closer. It made him more of a
stranger.
She, too, was saving up what she had learned until after the visit, when she
could think it over and decide what it all meant. She did not know what her
conclusions would be, but her heart went ahead of her mind, and she looked
now for signs of weakness, weariness, illness, a plea for help—something to
make a woman sacrifice the remainder of her life, wait another ten years if
need be, and go to join him in the taiga.
But he was smiling! Smiling just as complacently as he had at Krasnaya
Presnya! He was always so independent; he never needed sympathy from
anyone. He even seemed to be comfortable on that small, bare stool; he seemed
to be looking around with some enjoyment, collecting material for his history
even in this place. He looked well, and his eyes sparkled with amusement at
his jailers. Did he really need a woman’s loyalty?
Nadya, however, had not yet thought all this.
And Gleb did not realize what she was close to thinking.
Klimentiev was at the door.
“Time’s up!”
“Already?” said Nadya in surprise.
Gleb frowned in an effort to remember the most important items left on his
list of “things to tell her,” learned by heart before the visit.
“Oh yes! Don’t be surprised if they move me to some place a long way from
here and letters stop altogether.”
“Might they? Where to?” Nadya cried.
Such frightening news. And he’d kept it to himself till now!
“God knows,” he said with a shrug, but as if he meant it to be taken literally.
“Don’t tell me you’ve started believing in God?”
(They hadn’t managed to talk about anything!)
Gleb smiled. “Why not? Pascal, Newton, Einstein—”
“Weren’t you told not to mention names?” the guard bawled.
“Time’s up now!”
Husband and wife rose together, and now that there was no danger of the
visit ending prematurely, Gleb reached over the table, put his arms around
Nadya’s slender neck, kissed it, and pressed his mouth to her lips. He had
forgotten how soft they were. He had no hope of being in Moscow in a year’s
time to kiss them again. His voice shook with tenderness: “Do whatever is best
for yourself. I shall always. . . .”
He didn’t finish.
They looked into each other’s eyes.
“What do you call this, then? I’m terminating the visit!” roared the guard,
tugging at Nerzhin’s shoulder.
Nerzhin broke away.
“So terminate it, damn you,” he muttered barely audibly.
Nadya backed toward the door, waving good-bye to her husband with the
fingers of one raised hand. A hand without a ring.
Still waving, she disappeared from the doorway.