Chapter-91-Abandon-Hope,-All-Ye-Who-Enter-Here

IN SPITE OF HIS FEARS AND FOREBODINGS, Monday was going well. Innokenty
felt some lingering anxiety, but by early afternoon he had regained his
equilibrium, and he did not lose it again. It was imperative now to take refuge
in a theater for the evening so that he could stop fearing every ring at the door.
But the phone rang. It was almost theater time, and Dotty was just emerging
from the bathroom.
Innokenty stood staring at the telephone, like a dog at a hedgehog.
“Dotty, answer the phone! I’m not in, and you don’t know when I’ll be back.
They’ll ruin our evening, damn them!”
Dotty had become even prettier since yesterday. She always became prettier
when she was admired, and then she was admired even more and became
prettier still.
Holding the skirts of her dressing gown together with one hand, she padded
over to the telephone and gently but firmly picked up the receiver.
“Yes? . . . He’s not at home. . . . Who, who?” Suddenly she was all affability;
that little lift of the shoulders was always a sign of eagerness to please. “Good
evening, Comrade General! Yes, I’ll find out right away. . . .” She quickly
covered the phone with her hand and whispered, “The Boss! Sounds very
friendly.”
Innokenty wavered. The Boss, sounding friendly, calling in person, in the
evening. . . . His wife noticed his indecision.
“Just a minute, I can hear the door opening; it could be him. Yes, it is! Ini!
Don’t stop to take your coat off; come quickly; the general’s on the phone!”
However incorrigibly suspicious-minded the person at the other end of the
telephone might be, from the tone of Dotty’s voice he could almost see
Innokenty hurriedly wiping his feet at the door, crossing the carpeted floor, and
taking the receiver.
The Boss was in a good mood. His message was that Innokenty’s posting had
just been finally confirmed. He would fly out on Wednesday, changing planes
in Paris. He was to hand over the last of his current work tomorrow and come
along for half an hour right now to clear up one or two details. A car had
already been sent for him.
Innokenty straightened up from the telephone a different man. He took such a
deep breath in his happiness that the air seemed to have time to permeate his
whole body. He breathed out slowly and, with the air, expelled his doubts and
fears.
Incredible!
He had walked the tightrope in a crosswind without falling!
“Just imagine, Dotty, I’m flying on Wednesday! And right now. . . .”
Dotty, with one ear to the receiver, had heard it all for herself. But as she
straightened up, she was obviously far from happy. Innokenty’s departure
alone, explicable and acceptable the day before yesterday, was hurtful and
humiliating today.
“Do you think,” she said, looking sulky, “the one or two details might
possibly include me?”
“Yes . . . well . . . m-m-maybe.”
“What did you tell them about me, anyway?”
Well, he had said something. Said something he couldn’t now repeat to her,
and it was too late now to play it differently.
But with the confidence she had gained yesterday, Dotty was able to speak
freely.
“Ini, we’ve always made our discoveries together! We’ve always shared
new experiences! You wouldn’t go to see the Yellow Devil without me, would
you? No, I simply can’t accept it; you’ve got to think about the two of us!”
This was nothing compared to what she could come out with later. In the
presence of foreigners, she would be repeating the most stupidly orthodox
banalities, which would make Innokenty’s ears burn. She would be vilifying
America and buying everything she could lay her hands on there. But he was
forgetting. It wouldn’t be like that. He would come clean once he got there—
and how much of it would she be capable of understanding?
“It will all work out, Dotty, but it takes time. Right now I have to go and
present myself, complete the formalities, get to know people—”
“But I want to go right away! Right now is when I want to go! I can’t be left
behind!”
She did not know what she would be letting herself in for. She did not know
what it was like having a twisted, round rope under slippery soles. And now
he would have to spring from his perch and fly through the air, perhaps without
a safety net. A second body, plump and soft and unused to hardship, could not
fly beside him.
Innokenty smiled nicely and shook his wife gently by her shoulders.
“Well, I’ll try. It isn’t what was agreed before, but let’s see how it goes now.
In any case, you needn’t worry. I will send for you very soon. . . .”
He kissed an unresponsive cheek. Dotty was not at all convinced. The
harmony established yesterday was forgotten.
“Anyway, get dressed now—no need to hurry. We will miss the first act, but
that won’t spoil the whole thing. . . . We’ll get there for Act Two. . . . Anyway
I’ll give you a tinkle from the ministry.”
He scarcely had time to don his uniform before the driver rang the doorbell.
It was neither Viktor, who usually drove him, nor Kostya. This driver was a
lean, lively fellow with a pleasant, intelligent face. He went down the stairs
jauntily, almost side by side with Innokenty, twirling the ignition key on its
cord.
“I don’t remember seeing you before,” Innokenty said, buttoning his overcoat
as he went.
“I even remember your stairway; I’ve picked you up twice before.”
The driver’s smile was genuine but vaguely mischievous. It would be good
to have a bright fellow like this driving your own car.
They drove off. Innokenty had taken the rear seat. The driver twice tried to
make a joke over his shoulder, but Innokenty wasn’t listening. Suddenly the car
swerved sharply and pulled up flush with the pavement. A young man wearing
a soft hat and an overcoat pinched in at the waist was standing at the curb with
his finger raised.
“A mechanic, from our garage,” the amiable driver explained, and made as if
to open the right-hand front door. But the door simply refused to open; the lock
was jammed.
The driver swore without exceeding the limits of urban decency and said,
“Comrade Counselor! Could he possibly sit next to you? It’s a bit awkward,
because he’s my boss.”
“Yes, of course,” Innokenty readily agreed, making room for him. He was
intoxicated, overexcited, mentally holding out his hand for his letter of
appointment and visa, imagining himself boarding the morning plane at
Vnukovo the day after tomorrow; but he would not begin to relax before he got
to Warsaw, and even there a telegram might arrive to stop his journey.
The mechanic, gripping a long lighted cigarette with the corner of his mouth,
got into the car with an offhand “All right by you?” and plopped down beside
Innokenty.
The car jerked forward.
Innokenty scowled at him in disgust (What a boor!) but was soon absorbed in
his thoughts again, ignoring the route.
Puffing at his cigarette, the mechanic had already half filled the car with
smoke.
Time to put him in his place.
“Could you perhaps open the window!” Innokenty said, raising just his right
eyebrow.
Irony was lost on the mechanic. Instead of opening the window, he lay back
in his seat, took a piece of paper from his inside pocket, unfolded it, and held it
out to Innokenty.
“Comrade Chief! Could you kindly read this for me? I’ll shine a light.”
The car turned sharply into a steep ill-lit street, possibly Pushechnaya. The
mechanic shone a pocket flashlight on a scrap of pinkish paper. Shrugging his
shoulders, Innokenty grudgingly accepted the sheet of paper and began reading
casually, as if to himself.
“Authorized. Deputy Prosecutor General, USSR. . . .”
He was still too engrossed in his own thoughts to wonder whether the
mechanic was illiterate, simply incapable of understanding the document, or
perhaps drunk and anxious to confide in somebody.
“Warrant for the arrest . . .” he read, still not taking in what he was reading
—“of Volodin, Innokenty Artemievich, born 1919”—and only then did a single
great needle pierce his body from top to bottom and scalding heat envelop it.
Innokenty opened his mouth, but before he could utter a sound, before the hand
holding the pink page fell on his knees, the “mechanic” had gripped his
shoulder in a painful hold and growled menacingly: “Easy now, take it easy;
don’t move or I’ll strangle you here!”
He blinded Volodin with the flashlight, blew cigarette smoke into his face . . .
and retrieved the document.
Innokenty had read that he was arrested, which spelled disaster and the end
of his life, but for one brief moment what he could not bear was the man’s
insolence, his vise-like grip, the cigarette smoke, and the light shining in his
face.
“Let go!” he cried, trying to free himself with his own weak fingers. It had
finally sunk in that this really was a warrant for his arrest, but it might, he
thought, be merely an unfortunate coincidence that he had landed in this car and
given the “mechanic” a lift; he imagined that if only he could shake them off
and get to his boss in the ministry, the warrant would be canceled.
He tugged convulsively at the handle of the left side door, but it would not
give; it, too, was jammed.
“Driver! You’ll answer for this! What is the meaning of this provocation?”
Innokenty cried angrily,
“I serve the Soviet Union, Counselor,” the driver rapped out, with an insolent
glance over his shoulder.
Obeying the traffic regulations, the car circled the whole brightly lit expanse
of Lubyanka Square as though it were making a valedictory round, giving
Innokenty one last look at this world and the five-story bulk of the
amalgamated Old and New Lubyankas, where he was to end his life.
Cars clustered at the traffic lights and then broke free, trolleys swished past,
buses honked, people walked by in dense crowds, and no one knew or saw the
victim being dragged to execution before their very eyes.
A little red flag, lit up by a searchlight from a recess in the roof, flapped in a
gap between the columns of the tower above the Old Great Lubyanka. It was
like Garshin’s little red flower, which had absorbed all the world’s evil. Two
insensate stone naiads, semi-recumbent, gazed down scornfully at the miniature
citizens pottering about below.
The car drove past the facade of the world-famous building, which levied
tribute in human lives from all continents, and turned into Great Lubyanka
Street.
“Let go, I tell you!” Innokenty was still struggling to shake free of the
mechanic’s fingers, which were digging into his shoulder near the neck.
The black iron gate opened as soon as the car pointed its radiator at them and
closed again as soon as it had passed through.
The car coasted through the dark gateway into the yard.
The mechanic had relaxed his hold in the gateway. Once in the yard, he
removed his hand from Innokenty’s neck. “Out we get!” he said peremptorily
as he scrambled from the car.
By now it was obvious that he was perfectly sober.
The driver also got out.
“Out with you! Hands behind your back!” he ordered. Could this icy voice of
command really belong to the jester of a little while back?
Innokenty climbed out of the mantrap on wheels, straightened up, and,
although there was no obvious reason for him to do so, obediently put his
hands behind his back.
The arrest had been rough but not so terrifying as might be expected. He even
felt a certain relief: no more need to fear, no need to struggle, no need to plot
and plan. He felt the pleasurable numb relaxation that sometimes pervades the
body of a wounded man.
Innokenty surveyed the small yard, which was patchily lit by two or three
lights and lamps here and there in upper windows. Walled in by towering
buildings, the yard was like the bottom of a well.
“No looking around!” the driver barked. “Move!”
With Innokenty in the middle, the three of them filed past uninterested MGB
personnel, under a low arch, down steps into another little yard, dark under a
low roof, turned left, and discovered a neat front door like the entrance to an
eminent physician’s office.
The door opened onto a short, very tidy corridor flooded with electric light.
Its freshly painted floor seemed to have been washed very recently, and a strip
of carpet ran down the middle.
The driver made a strange clicking noise with his tongue, as if he were
calling a dog. But there was no dog.
The corridor ended at a glass door with faded curtains on the other side. The
door was reinforced by a steel grille of the sort used to fence flower beds at
railway stations. On the door, instead of a doctor’s nameplate, there was a sign
saying “Reception of Prisoners.”
There was no line.
They rang. The bell was an antique with a handle to turn. After a while,
someone peeked around the curtain, then opened the door: a guard with a long,
blank face wearing sky blue epaulets with a sergeant’s white stripes across
them. The driver took the pink form from the mechanic and showed it to the
guard. He scanned it indifferently, as a drowsy pharmacist disturbed in the
night might read a prescription, and the two of them went inside.
Innokenty and the mechanic stood in profound silence outside the firmly
closed door.
“Reception of Prisoners” made him think of another sign meaning much the
same: “Mortuary.” Innokenty couldn’t even be bothered to take a good look at
the smart aleck in the sharp overcoat who was playing this silly game with
him. He should perhaps have been protesting, shouting, demanding justice; but
he had even forgotten that he was clasping his hands behind his back and
continued to hold them there. Thinking had come to a dead stop. He stared like
a man under hypnosis at the words “Reception of Prisoners.”
There was the sound of a key turning smoothly in an English lock. The longfaced
guard nodded them in and went ahead, making those dog-calling clicks
with his tongue.
Still no dog.
This corridor was just as brightly lit and just as clinically clean.
There were two doors in the wall, both painted olive green. The sergeant
flung one of them open and said, “Inside.”
Innokenty went in. He had scarcely had time to look around and see that the
room was empty except for a large, rough table and a pair of stools, and that it
was windowless, when two of them jumped on him, the driver from the one
side, the mechanic from behind, held him with all four arms, and adroitly
searched his pockets.
“What’s the meaning of this thuggery?” Innokenty cried feebly. “What right
do you have?” He resisted briefly, but the realization that this was not a
mugging but men carrying out a routine duty robbed his resistance of force and
his voice of conviction.
They removed his wristwatch and fished out two notebooks, a fountain pen,
and a handkerchief. He caught sight also of the narrow silver epaulets in their
hands and was struck by the coincidence that they, too, belonged to the
diplomatic service and had the same number of stars as he did. They relaxed
their rough embrace, and the mechanic held out the handkerchief.
“Take it.”
Innokenty shuddered.
“After it’s been in your dirty hands?” he said shrilly.
The handkerchief fell to the floor.
“You’ll get a receipt for your valuables,” the driver said, and they both
hurried out.
The long-faced sergeant, however, was in no hurry. Glancing at the floor, he
advised Innokenty to pick up the handkerchief.
Innokenty did not bend down.
“What have they done? Have they ripped my epaulets off?” He had only now
realized, feeling under his overcoat, that they were no longer on the shoulders
of his uniform. He was furious.
“Hands behind your back!” the sergeant said tonelessly. “March!”
He clicked his tongue.
Still no dog.
Rounding a sharp bend, they found themselves in another corridor, with
facing rows of small olive green doors in close succession, each with a shiny
oval number plate. A careworn middle-aged woman in army regulation skirt
and tunic, and the same light blue epaulets with sergeant’s white stripes, was
walking between the rows of doors. As Innokenty and the guard appeared from
around the bend, she took a quick look through the peephole in one of the
doors. When they drew level, she let the flap fall back over the peephole and
looked at Innokenty, as though he had walked that way hundreds of times
before and she was not a bit surprised to see him walking there yet again. Her
face was somber. She inserted a long key into the steel casing of the lock on a
door numbered 8, unlocked it noisily, and nodded to him.
“Inside.”
Innokenty crossed the threshold, and before he could turn around and ask for
an explanation, the door was shut behind him and the key grated the lock.
So this was now to be his home! For a day? For months? For years and
years? His quarters could not be called a room or even a cell because, as we
know from literature, a cell must have a window, if only a little one, and room
to pace the floor. Here, not only pacing the floor, not only lying down, but even
sitting comfortably was impossible. A small table and stool occupied almost
all the floor space. If you sat on the stool, you could not stretch your legs out
freely.
There was nothing else in the cell. To chest height the walls were paneled
and painted dark green. The upper part of the walls and the ceiling were
whitewashed and glaringly illuminated by a big two-hundred-watt electric
bulb enclosed in a wire basket.
Innokenty sat down. Twenty minutes ago, he had still been imagining himself
arriving in America and, of course, reminding them of his telephone call to the
embassy. Twenty minutes ago, his past life had seemed to him a harmonious
whole, every event lit by the steady light of premeditation and welded to other
events by white flashes of good fortune. But after the last twenty minutes, his
whole past life seemed to him just as certainly an agglomeration of errors, a
heap of meaningless fragments.
Sounds from the corridor reached him only twice, when a nearby door was
opened and closed. Every minute the little disk over the glazed peephole was
disturbed and a single inquisitorial eye observed Innokenty. The door was four
fingers thick, and the spy hole ran right through it, a cone of which the optic
was the apex. Innokenty surmised that it was made this way so that there was
nowhere in this torture chamber for the prisoner to escape the guard’s gaze.
It was hot and stuffy. He took off his warm winter overcoat and squinted
miserably at the ragged holes where his epaulets had been torn from his
uniform. Finding neither a nail nor any sort of protuberance on the walls, he
laid his overcoat and hat on the little table.
Strangely, now that lightning had struck and he has been arrested, Innokenty
felt no fear. On the contrary, his mind was released from its temporary
paralysis, and he began going over the blunders he had made.
Why had he not read the warrant in full? Was it drawn up correctly? Did it
have the official stamp? The public prosecutor’s authorization? Ah, yes, of
course, it invoked the public prosecutor’s authority right at the beginning. On
what date was the warrant signed? What was he charged with? Did the Boss
know about it when he sent for me? He must have known. So his summons was
a trick? But why this bizarre procedure, why this farce with the “driver” and
the “mechanic”?
In one of his pockets his hand felt something small and hard. He took it out.
An elegant miniature pencil, it had detached itself from a notebook. Innokenty
was greatly cheered by this little pencil: It could prove to be very useful! Rank
amateurs! Even here in the Lubyanka, they were rank amateurs, didn’t even
know how to search a prisoner! Trying to think of the best place to hide the
pencil, Innokenty broke it in two and eased one half under the sole of each of
his shoes.
Heavens, how careless! He hadn’t noticed what he was accused of! Perhaps
his arrest had nothing at all to do with that telephone call? Perhaps it was a
mistake, a coincidence? What was the correct way to behave now?
Maybe there was nothing they could accuse him of? Probably not. Let’s just
arrest him!
He had not been there very long, but several times already he had heard the
steady hum of some sort of machine beyond the wall farthest from the corridor.
A disturbing thought suddenly occurred to Innokenty. What sort of machine
would you expect to find in a place like this? This was a prison, not a factory.
Why the machinery? Any man of the forties had heard so much about
mechanical means of destroying people that something sinister immediately
came to mind. A thought at once bizarre and yet highly probable flashed
through Innokenty’s mind: that this was a machine for grinding the bones of
murdered prisoners. He felt frightened.
Yes—by now the thought stung worse than ever—what a mistake not even to
read the warrant through, not to begin protesting his innocence then and there!
He had submitted to arrest so meekly that they must be convinced of his guilt!
How could he have failed to protest? Why, oh why, had he not protested? It
must look for all the world as if he had been expecting arrest, that he was
resigned to it.
He was cut to the quick by this fatal mistake! His first thought was to jump
up, thump and kick, yell at the top of his voice that he was innocent, but second
and wiser thoughts prevailed: None of that would come as a surprise to them;
no doubt people were always banging and shouting here, and his silence in the
first few minutes had complicated things anyway.
To think that he had let himself be taken so easily! A high-ranking diplomat
allowing himself to be plucked from his apartment, from the streets of
Moscow, carried off, and locked up in this torture chamber with no attempt to
resist, without a sound.
There could be no escape from here! No escape from here!
Unless, perhaps, the Chief was still expecting him? Was there any way to get
through to the Chief, if only under escort? How to find out?
No, his thoughts were becoming no clearer, only more confused and
complicated.
The machine beyond the wall hummed and was silent by turns.
Innokenty’s eyes, blinded by the artificial light that was too bright for this
high but narrow three cubic meters of space, had for some time sought relief by
resting on the single black square that broke the monotony of the ceiling. This
square of wire mesh was to all appearances an air vent, though it was
uncertain what it led to or away from. Then, suddenly, it was starkly obvious
that this vent . . . was not a vent at all, that poisonous gas was gradually
released through it, perhaps produced by that very same humming machine, that
they had been pumping gas in from the very first minute he had been shut in
there, and that such a hermetically sealed cell, with not even the narrowest of
cracks between door and floor, could have no other purpose.
That was why they kept spying on him through the peephole—to see whether
he was still conscious or already gassed.
And that was why his thoughts were so confused; he was losing
consciousness! That was why for some time now he had been short of breath!
That was why there was such a pounding in his head!
Gas was seeping in! Colorless! Odorless!
Terror! The primitive animal terror that unites predators and their prey in a
single stampeding herd fleeing from a forest fire gripped Innokenty, and
incapable by now of any other thought, he began hammering on the door with
fists and feet, calling upon any living being.
“Open up! Open up! I’m suffocating! Give me air!”
That was another reason why the spy hole was conical: No fist could reach
the glass to break it!
An unblinking eye pressed against the glass on the other side and gloated
over the wreckage of Innokenty.
What a spectacle! The detached eye, the eye without a face, the eye that has
concentrated all expression in itself! . . . now watching you die!
There was no way out!
Innokenty collapsed onto the stool.
The gas was suffocating him. . . .