Chapter-41-And-Another-One

GERASIMOVICH AND HIS WIFE KISSED.
He was short, but his wife was no taller.
They had been lucky with their guard, a decent, easygoing young fellow who
didn’t in the least mind their kissing. Indeed, it embarrassed him to have to
intrude on them. Had it been possible, he would have turned away and looked
at the wall for half an hour. But Lieutenant Colonel Klimentiev had given
orders that the doors of all seven interrogation compartments should be left
open so that he could keep watch on the guards from the hallway.
Not that he himself minded these people kissing. He knew that no state secret
could leak as a result. But he was wary of his own guards and prisoners. There
were informers among them who might “drip” on Klimentiev himself.
Husband and wife kissed. But it was not like the kisses that had thrilled them
when they were young. This kiss, in defiance of fate and authority, was a kiss
without color, taste, or odor, the pale kiss a ghost might bestow in a dream.
They sat down, separated by an interrogation table with a warped plywood
top.
That clumsy little table had more of a history behind it than many a human
life contains. Generations of prisoners, men and women, had sat there sobbing,
numb with fear, fighting against murderous sleeplessness, some still proudly
defiant, some signing trivial denunciations of family and friends. They were
not usually allowed to handle pencils or pens, except for the few required to
make depositions in their own handwriting. Those few had contrived to leave
their marks, those peculiar absentminded scribbles and scratches that
mysteriously preserve the tortuous workings of the unconscious.
Looking at his wife, Gerasimovich thought how unattractive she had become.
There were deep hollows under her eyes, wrinkles around her eyes and mouth;
her skin was slack—Natasha had obviously stopped caring about it. Her coat
was prewar and should at least have been turned long ago; its fur collar had
molted; that headscarf was from time immemorial, bought, he seemed to
remember, with coupons in Komsomolsk-on-Amur, long ago, and worn by
Natasha in Leningrad when she went to get water from the Neva.
But Gerasimovich suppressed the base thought that his wife was ugly. The
woman before him was the only woman in the world for him, half of himself.
He was looking at the woman with whom all his memories were entwined.
However fresh and pretty a young girl might be, she could not overshadow
Natasha; her memories would be too shallow, her experience too superficial.
When they first met at a house in Srednyaya Podyacheskaya Street, by the
Lion Bridge, Natasha was not yet eighteen. It was a New Year’s party, 1930.
Twenty-five years ago, in six days’ time. Looking back, you could see clearly
what 1919, and 1930, had done to Russia. But every new year, as it arrives, is
seen in rosy colors. You cannot know what associations that date will acquire
in the people’s memory. As always, they had believed in 1930.
But that was the year when Gerasimovich was arrested for the first time. As
a ‘‘wrecker.”
Illarion Pavlovich had begun work just as the word “engineer” was
becoming synonymous with “enemy” and when proletarian pride demanded
that every engineer be suspected as a wrecker. To make it worse, the young
Gerasimovich’s upbringing compelled him always to bow courteously and say
“Excuse me, please” in a very gentle voice, to the right people and to the
wrong people. At meetings he lost his voice and sat quiet as a mouse. He had
no idea how irritating people found him.
But though the case against him was concocted with great skill, it would not
stretch to more than five years. When he got to the Amur, he was immediately
excused from close confinement, and his sweetheart joined him and became his
wife.
There were not many nights when husband and wife did not dream of
Leningrad. The day came when they were due to return. But it was 1935, and
they were swept back by the tidal wave of arrests after Kirov’s assassination.
Natalia Pavlovna was scrutinizing her husband just as closely. She had once
watched the changes in his face, the hardening of his mouth, the cold and at
times fierce glint through his pince-nez. Illarion had stopped bowing, stopped
constantly apologizing. His past was always held against him, he was
dismissed from job after job or employed on work below his qualifications,
and they had traveled from place to place, always hard up; they had lost a
daughter, lost a son. In the end, in desperation, they had risked going back to
Leningrad. As it happened, in June 1941. In Leningrad they had even less
chance of a tolerable existence. Her husband’s record dogged him everywhere.
But these experiences, instead of weakening the laboratory wraith, toughened
him. He survived an autumn of trench digging. When the first snow fell, he
became a gravedigger. In the besieged city, no profession was more essential
or more remunerative. Survivors paid their last respects to the departed by
giving away their beggarly cubic centimeter of bread.
Who could eat that bread without shuddering? Illarion’s justification was that
“our fellow citizens showed us no pity; we’ll show them none!”
The couple came through their ordeal. Only for Illarion to be arrested again,
before the siege ended. This time for “intending” to betray his homeland. Many
arrests were made in Leningrad for treasonable intent—people who hadn’t
been in occupied territory could not be accused of actual collaboration. But if
someone like Gerasimovich, a former convict, had come to Leningrad at the
outbreak of war, it was obviously with the intention of joining the Germans.
They would have arrested his wife as well, but she was dangerously ill at the
time.
Natalia Pavlovna scrutinized her husband and, strangely, found that the years
of suffering had left no deep mark on him. The gaze behind his gleaming pincenez
was as intelligent and steady as ever. His cheeks were not sunken; there
were no wrinkles; he was wearing an expensive suit and a carefully knotted
tie.
Anyone might think that she, not he, was the jailbird.
Her first, unkind thought was that he was having a fine old time in the special
prison. He was obviously not bullied; he was working in his own field; his
wife’s suffering meant nothing to him.
But she stifled this spiteful thought and asked in a weak voice: “How are you
getting on there?”
As if she had waited twelve months for this visit, spent 360 nights thinking of
her husband on her chilly widow’s couch, just to ask, “How are you getting
on?”
And Gerasimovich, holding tight inside his narrow, constricted breast a
whole life that had cramped and stunted his mental powers, a whole world as a
prisoner in the taiga and the desert, in solitary confinement in between
interrogations, and now in the comfort of a special prison, answered, “All
right.”
They had been given only half an hour. The sands were trickling away in an
unstemmable stream down the glass throat of Time. Dozens of questions,
wishes, complaints, struggled to be heard first, but all Natalia Pavlovna
managed to ask was:
“When did you hear about the visit?”
“The day before yesterday. And you?”
“On Tuesday. The lieutenant colonel has just asked me whether I’m your
sister.”
“Because of your patronymic?”
“Yes.”
When they were engaged and on the Amur, everyone had taken them for
brother and sister. There was between them the sort of external and internal
resemblance that makes husband and wife more than just a married couple.
“How are things at work?” Illarion Pavlovich asked.
She started. “Why do you ask? Have you heard?”
“Heard what?”
He knew something but didn’t know if she had the same thing in mind.
He knew that prisoners’ wives were always given a hard time outside.
But how could he know that she had been dismissed from her post the
previous Wednesday because of her connection with him? She had already
been told that she could visit him and had not immediately started looking for a
new job. She was waiting until she saw him, as though a miracle might happen
and their meeting might illuminate her life and show her what to do.
But how could he give her any practical advice, when he had spent so many
years in prison and was unskilled in the ways of the world outside?
What she must decide was whether or not to renounce him.
Visiting time was running out in that drab, inadequately heated room, dimly
lit through a barred window, and her hope of a miracle was ebbing with it.
Natalia Pavlovna realized that she could not convey her loneliness and her
suffering to her husband in that miserly half hour, that he ran on rails of his
own, lived a life as regular as clockwork, and would understand nothing. It
would be better not to upset him.
The guard moved away to study the plaster on the wall.
“Tell me about yourself, please tell me.” Illarion Pavlovich held his wife’s
hand across the table, and his eyes were warm with affection for her, as they
always had been in the most grueling months of the siege.
“Larik! Are you likely to get any remission?”
She had in mind the system at the camp on the Amur where they credited you
with two days served for every day worked, so that your sentence ended
before the appointed date.
Illarion shook his head. “How could I? They’ve never given remission here;
you know that. Invent something important, and they may let you out ahead of
time. But the thing is”—he glanced at the guard, whose eyes were elsewhere
—“the thing is that the inventions here are of a very dubious kind.”
He dared not put it any more clearly.
He took his wife’s hands and brushed his cheek against them.
Yes, in icebound Leningrad he had not scrupled to take as a burial fee the
bread ration of someone who would need burying himself the day after.
But now—he couldn’t bring himself. . . .
“Is it miserable for you by yourself? Are you very miserable?” he asked
tenderly, rubbing his cheek against her hand.
Miserable? Right then she was horrified; the visit was slipping away; it
would soon be broken off, and she would go out to the Lefortovo Rampart none
the richer for it, go out into the joyless streets alone, alone, alone. . . . The
stultifying aimlessness of every day she lived, everything she did. There was
neither sweet nor hot nor bitter; her life was like dingy cotton wool.
He stroked her hand.
“Natalia, my love! If you reckon up my two terms and think how long it’s
been already, there’s not much left now. Only three years. Only three.”
“Only three?” She interrupted indignantly. She felt her voice trembling, felt
that she was no longer in control if it. “Only three! For you it’s ‘only’! For you
quick release would ‘entail something objectionable.’ You live among friends!
You’re doing the work you enjoy most! You don’t have to be smuggled into
somebody else’s room! But I’ve been sacked! I’ve got nothing to live on!
Nobody will take me on! I can’t go on! I no longer have the strength! I can’t
stand another month of it! Not a single month! I will be better off dead! The
neighbors shove me around just as they like; they’ve thrown my clothes chest
out; they’ve pulled my shelf off the wall; they know I dare not say a word . . .
that they could get me expelled from Moscow! I’ve stopped going to see my
sisters and Aunt Zhenya; they all jeer at me and call me the biggest fool on
earth. They keep at me to divorce you and marry somebody else! When will it
end? Look what I’ve turned into! I’m thirty-seven! In three years I will be an
old woman! I go home and I don’t eat, don’t tidy my room. I loathe it. I just
collapse on the sofa and lie there exhausted. Larik, my dear, do whatever it
takes to get out earlier! You’re a genius! Invent something for them, so that
they’ll leave you in peace. I know you’ve got something for them right now!
Save me! Sa-a-ave me-e-e!!”
She had not meant to say all this, grief-stricken as she was! Shaking with
sobs and kissing her husband’s small hand, she lowered her head onto the
warped and splintery table that had seen many such tears.
“Pull yourself together, Citizeness, please,” the guard said guiltily, glancing
at the open door.
Gerasimovich’s face was frozen in a grimace beneath his gleaming pincenez.
The unseemly noise of her sobbing could be heard in the hallway. The
lieutenant colonel loomed menacingly in the doorway, looked witheringly at
the woman’s back, and closed the door himself.
The regulations did not specifically forbid tears. They implicitly assumed
that tears could not occur.