Chapter-39-Fine-Words,-Those,

“To the Taiga!”
NINE-TENTHS OF THE CITY was still strange to her, but Nadya had mastered the
geography lesson that so many Russian women have learned to their sorrow,
the location of Moscow’s prisons. They were, she found, numerous, and
thoughtfully dotted about the capital at regular intervals, so that you need never
be very far from one. Delivering parcels for Gleb, inquiring after him, visiting
him, she had learned to distinguish the Big Lubyanka, which catered to the
whole Soviet Union, from the Little Lubyanka, which served only the Moscow
oblast. She learned, too, that every station had its detention cells; she had been
in Butyrki and Taganka Prisons a time or two and knew which trams to take
(the timetables were no help) for Lefortovo and Krasnaya Presnya. She herself
lived hard by Matrusskaya Tishina, a prison abolished at the time of the
Revolution, but reestablished and reinforced later on.
Since Gleb had been sent back from a distant prison camp to Moscow, and
not to a camp this time but to a remarkable institution called a “special
prison,” where they were well fed and employed on scientific research, Nadya
had started seeing her husband again from time to time. But wives were not
supposed to know where exactly their husbands were kept—so husbands were
brought in for these rare meetings to one or another of the Moscow prisons.
Visits to the Taganka were the cheeriest. This was a prison for common
criminals, not political prisoners, and the regimen there was easygoing.
Prisoners and visitors met in the guards’ club. Prisoners were brought along
the deserted Street of the Masons in an open bus, wives would be waiting for
them on the pavement, and before the visit officially began, a man could
embrace his wife, remain with her, tell her things not allowed by the rules, and
even pass things to her. Arrangements during the visit were just as casual.
Husbands and wives sat side by side; there was only one pair of guard’s ears
for every four couples.
Butyrki was another cheerful, easygoing prison. It struck a chill into the
wives, but prisoners who ended up there after the Lubyanka were delighted by
the general laxity. The light in the “boxes” was not blinding; you could walk
along hallways without keeping your hands behind your back, talk in a normal
voice in your cell, look out under the “muzzles” on windows, lie on the plank
bed in the daytime, or even sleep underneath it. Butyrki was soft in other ways,
too; you could sleep with your hands under your overcoat, your glasses were
not taken away for the night, matches were allowed in cells, they didn’t gut
every cigarette of its tobacco, and loaves sent in by your family were only cut
in four, not into little pieces.
But wives knew nothing of these indulgences. They saw a fortress wall four
times the height of a man, stretching a whole block along Novoslobodskaya
Street. They saw iron gates between mighty concrete pillars, and no ordinary
gates at that, opening automatically in a slow yawn to admit prison trucks and
automatically closing behind them. Women visitors passed on admission
through an opening in a stone wall two meters thick and were conducted
around the grim Pugachev Tower between walls several times a man’s height.
Ordinary zeks saw their visitors through two sets of bars, with a guard pacing
between them as though he himself were caged, while zeks of the higher
category, “sharashka” people, and their visitors faced each other across a wide
table with a solid partition underneath it so that feet could not touch and
exchange signals, and with a guard standing like an unblinking effigy at the side
of the table, listening to the conversation. But the most oppressive feature of
Butyrki was that husbands seemed to materialize from the depths of the jail,
exhaled by those thick, damp walls for half an hour to reassure their wives,
like smiling ghosts, that they were comfortable and wanted for nothing, and
then melting into those walls again.
This was the first time Nadya had visited Gleb in Lefortovo.
The senior guard checked off her name on his list and pointed toward an
annex.
Several women were waiting already in a bare room with two long benches
and a bare table. A wicker basket and shopping bags, evidently full of
eatables, stood on the table. Although prisoners in the sharashka were
adequately fed, Nadya, who had brought only some light pastry straws in a
paper bag, felt resentful and ashamed that she couldn’t treat her husband to
something tasty even once a year. She had gotten up early, while the others in
the dormitory were still asleep, to make these straws with all that was left of
her flour, sugar, and butter rations. She hadn’t had time to buy sweets or cakes
and anyway had very little money until she could draw her grant. Visiting day
coincided with her husband’s birthday, and she had nothing to give him! A
good book? She couldn’t even do that after her last visit. She had brought him a
little volume of Yesenin’s poems, gotten hold of by a miracle. He had had an
identical copy at the front, and it had disappeared when he was arrested.
Alluding to this, Nadya had written on the title page, “So shall all else that you
have lost return to you.” But Lieutenant Colonel Klimentiev had ripped the
inscribed page out in her presence and returned it to her, remarking that nothing
in writing could be passed to prisoners; “texts” must go through the censor
separately. When Gleb heard this, he ground his teeth and asked her not to
bring any more books.
Four women sat around the table, one a young woman with a three-year-old
girl. Nadya didn’t know any of them. They acknowledged her greeting and
continued their animated conversation. A woman of thirty-five or forty, in a fur
coat that was far from new and a threadbare headscarf, sat on a short bench
against the opposite wall with her legs crossed and arms folded. Her whole
pose expressed her determination to avoid all contact and conversation. There
was nothing resembling a parcel anywhere near her.
The company at the table would have made room for Nadya, but she did not
feel like joining them. She, too, wanted to be alone with her thoughts that
morning. She went over to the woman sitting by herself and said, “Do you
mind?” There was barely room for two on the bench.
The woman raised her eyes. They were quite colorless. They showed no
understanding of Nadya’s question. They looked at Nadya and beyond her.
Nadya sat down, tucked her hands into her sleeves, inclined her head to one
side so that her cheek sank into her imitation astrakhan collar, and sat as still as
her neighbor. At that moment she didn’t want to think about anything except
Gleb, the conversation they would shortly be having, and something extending
from the dim past into the invisible future, something that was not Gleb or
Nadya but the two of them together, something usually called by the hackneyed
word “love.”
But she was unable to shut out the talk around the table. They were telling
each other what their husbands were given to eat morning and evening, how
often underwear was washed in prison. . . . How did they know? Surely they
didn’t waste the precious minutes of a visit on such things? They enumerated
the foodstuffs they had brought—so many grams of this, so many kilos of that.
All this was an example of that stubborn womanly solicitude that makes a
family a family and keeps the human race going. But Nadya’s thought was
different—that it was an insult to reduce what should be great moments to the
humdrum, the miserable small change of everyday. Did it never occur to these
women to ask themselves who had dared to imprison their husbands? After all,
their husbands need never have been behind bars, need never have been forced
to eat prison food!
It was a long wait. They had been told to come at ten, but eleven o’clock
came, and still no one had appeared.
A seventh visitor, a woman with gray hair, arrived late and out of breath.
Nadya knew her from a previous visit; she was the engraver’s wife, his third
and also his first. She was very ready to tell her story; she had always adored
her husband and thought him very talented. But one day he announced that he
disliked her psychological profile, abandoned her and their child, and went off
with another woman. He lived three years with this other, the redhead; then he
was called up. He was taken prisoner almost immediately, but he had lived in
Germany as a free man and, alas, had affairs there, too. On his way back home
he was arrested at the frontier and sentenced to ten years. He let the redhead
know that he was in Butyrki and asked her to send food parcels, but she had
said, “If he’d betrayed me and not his motherland, I would find it easier to
forgive him!” After that, he had pleaded with his first wife; she had started
visiting and sending parcels, and now he kept begging her forgiveness and
swearing eternal love.
A bitter remark made by the engraver’s wife had echoed in Nadya’s mind: “I
dare say the best thing for us to do is to be unfaithful to our husbands while
they’re in jail; then they’ll appreciate us when they come out. Otherwise they’ll
think nobody wanted us, nobody would have us while they were away.” This
had stayed with Nadya because she sometimes thought the same herself.
On this occasion, too, the new arrival gave a fresh twist to the conversation
around the table. She started talking about the trouble she had had with the
lawyers on Nikolskaya Street. They had long styled themselves the “Model”
legal-aid bureau. But lawyers belonging to it charged thousands, spent a lot of
time in Moscow restaurants, and left their clients’ affairs to look after
themselves. The day came when they got on the wrong side of somebody or
other, were arrested, and were given ten years all around. The “Model” sign
was taken down, but the bureau, though no longer “model,” was replenished
with new legal advisers, who, just like their predecessors, charged thousands
and left their clients’ affairs to look after themselves. They explained in
confidence that big fees were necessary because they had to share them. They
were charging not just for themselves; the business had to pass through many
hands. The concrete wall of the law was like that of Butyrki, four times a
man’s height. Women could not take wing and flutter over it; they could only
walk around it, humbly pleading with some little gate to open. The course of
legal proceedings behind the wall of the law was like the mysterious workings
of an awesome machine, which—though the guilt of the accused was evident,
though the accused was pitted against the government—might at times
miraculously spit out a winning lottery ticket. The women paid lawyers not for
a win but for their dream of winning.
The engraver’s wife believed implicitly that she would win in the end. It
emerged from what she said that she had amassed forty thousand rubles by
selling her room and from contributions made by relatives, and had used it to
overpay four lawyers in succession; three petitions for clemency had been
lodged, and five appeals on the substance of the case. She had followed the
progress of all these appeals closely and had been given many assurances of a
favorable review. She knew by name all the regular attorneys in the three main
offices of the Public Prosecutor’s Department and was acclimatized to the
waiting rooms of the Supreme Court and the Supreme Soviet. As trustful
people, and especially women, will, she attached exaggerated importance to
every encouraging remark and every look that was not actually hostile.
“You have to write! Write to anybody and everybody!” she insisted, urging
other women to dash off down the same path. “Our husbands are suffering.
They won’t be freed without an effort. You must write!”
This talk took Nadya out of herself but also touched a sore spot. The
engraver’s aging wife spoke with such passion that it was easy to believe her:
She had stolen a march on them all, been cleverer than any of them; she would
undoubtedly get her husband out of prison! Nadya began to reproach herself:
What about me? Why couldn’t I have done the same? Why haven’t I been as
loyal a wife?
She had only once had dealings with a “model” legal-aid office, drawn up
only one appeal with a lawyer’s help, and paid him only 2,500, which was
probably too little. He had no doubt taken offense and done nothing.
“That’s right,” she said quietly, almost to herself. “Have we done all we
can? Are our consciences clear?”
Those at the table did not hear her above the general conversation. But her
neighbor looked around sharply, as though Nadya had elbowed her or insulted
her.
“What can we do?” she said angrily, emphasizing every word. “That’s all
moonshine! Article 58 means—detain indefinitely! Article 58 means—you’re
not just a criminal; you’re the enemy! You can’t buy your way out of Article 58
for a million!”
The lines in her face were deeper. Her voice had the ring of incurable
suffering.
Nadya’s heart went out to the older woman. The tone of her voice seemed to
apologize for what might sound like a pretentious reply.
”What I meant was that we do not sacrifice ourselves completely. The wives
of the Decembrists spared themselves nothing; they gave up everything to
follow their husbands. . . . If we can’t hope to free them, perhaps we can get
their sentences commuted to banishment? If he was sent to the very depths of
the taiga, beyond the Arctic Circle, I would be content to follow him; I would
give up everything. . . .”
The woman with the austere face of a nun under her shabby gray headscarf
looked at Nadya with surprise and respect.
“You still feel strong enough to go to the taiga? How fortunate you are! I no
longer have the strength for anything. The way I feel, if some well-off old man
would have me, I would marry him. . . .”
“Could you abandon your husband? While he was behind bars?”
The woman took Nadya by the sleeve.
“My dear girl! Love was easy in the nineteenth century! Did any one of the
Decembrists’ wives really perform such a heroic feat? Did she have
‘personnel departments’ challenging her to answer questionnaires? Did she
have to conceal her marriage like a plague sore or risk being sacked and
deprived of the five hundred rubles a month which was her sole income? Was
she ostracized in a communal apartment? Hissed at as an enemy of the people
when she went to the pump in the yard? Did her own mother and sisters urge
her to be sensible and divorce her husband? On the contrary! Wherever they
went the Decembrist wives were accompanied by the admiring murmurs of the
best people. Their heroic legend was a gift they graciously bestowed on poets.
When they set off for Siberia in their own expensive carriages, they did not
lose their Moscow residence permits, and with them the nine square meters of
living space that was all that was left to them, nor did they have to worry about
trivial problems ahead, like a black mark in a labor book, living in something
the size of a cupboard, having no saucepan, not even a crust of black bread!
Fine words, those, ‘to the taiga!’ Anyway, you may not have all that long to
wait!”
Her voice seemed about to break. Her passionate eloquence brought tears
into Nadya’s eyes. She tried to excuse herself.
“My husband’s been in prison nearly five years,” she said. “And before that
he was at the front. . . .”
“That doesn’t count!” the woman retorted. “Being at the front isn’t the same
thing! Waiting is easy then! Everybody else is waiting, too. You can talk about
it openly; you can read his letters to people. But when you have to wait and
keep quiet about him, that’s something else.”
She said no more. She could see that Nadya didn’t need to be told about it.
By now it was 11:30. Lieutenant Colonel Klimentiev came in at last,
accompanied by the sour, fat sergeant major. The sergeant major began
checking parcels, opening packages of factory biscuits, and breaking
homemade cakes in two. He even broke Nadya’s pastry straws, looking for the
note, the money, or the poison that might have been baked inside them.
Klimentiev meanwhile collected all the permits, entered the visitors’ names in
a big book, then drew himself up as though on parade and made an
announcement in his precise way.
“Attention please! You know the rules? The visit lasts thirty minutes. Nothing
must be passed directly to prisoners. Nothing must be accepted from prisoners.
It is forbidden to question prisoners about their work, their living conditions,
and their daily routine. Any infringement of these rules is punishable as a
criminal offense. Furthermore, shaking hands and kissing are forbidden as of
today. If this rule is broken, the visit is terminated immediately.”
The women remained silent.
Klimentiev called the first name: “Gerasimovich, Natalia Pavlovna!”
Nadya’s neighbor rose and went out into the hallway, walking clumsily in her
prewar felt boots.