Chapter-25-The-Church-of-Nikita-the-Martyr

HE SPOKE HER NAME, and his pampered body shivered with the onrush of
forgotten sensations.
He had been twenty-six, Agnia twenty-one. She was a girl from some other
world. Her misfortune was a sensitivity, a fastidiousness that made the normal
life of human beings impossible for her. Sometimes, when she was talking, her
brows and nostrils quivered as though she were about to take flight. No one
had ever said so many harsh words to Yakonov, reproached him so sternly for
behavior that might be thought perfectly ordinary but in which she, startlingly,
discerned something base and ignoble. Strangely, the more faults she
discovered in Anton, the more devoted to her he became.
He had to be cautious in argument with her. She was not very strong, and an
uphill walk, hurried movement, or even animated discussion tired her out. The
least little thing could upset her.
Nonetheless she found the strength to wander in the forest for days on end.
She did not, as city girls out for a walk in the woods traditionally do, take a
book with her; it would have interfered with her enjoyment of the forest. She
simply wandered around, sitting down occasionally, studying the secrets of the
forest. She always skipped descriptions of nature in Turgenev, which she
thought superficial. When Anton went with her, he was astonished by her
perceptiveness: She noticed how the trunk of a birch had bowed to the ground
in memory of a snowfall; she noticed the changing tints of the forest grass in the
evening. He never noticed anything of that sort himself; for him the forest was
just forest, green trees, good air. . . .
The Forest Rill, Yakonov had called her in the summer of 1927, which they
had spent in neighboring dachas. They went everywhere together, and
everybody assumed that they were engaged.
But that was very far from being so.
Agnia was neither pretty nor plain. Her expression changed continually: At
one moment she wore a winning smile; at the next she looked drawn and
unattractive. She was above middle height but slender, fragile, and her step
was so light that she seemed scarcely to touch the ground. Anton was quite
experienced and liked best a woman with some flesh on her, but he was
attracted to Agnia by something else, and when he had become used to her, he
told himself that he also liked her as a woman and that she would ripen with
time.
She shared the long summer days with him happily enough, walking verst
after verst into the green depths, lying beside him in forest clearings, but she
was reluctant even to let him stroke her hand.
“Must you?” she would say, trying to free herself.
It wasn’t fear of what people might think, because as they returned to the
holiday village she would gratify his amour propre and submit to walking arm
in arm.
Having convinced himself that he loved her, Anton fell at her feet in one of
those forest clearings and proposed. Agnia was deeply dismayed.
“I’m afraid I’m misleading you. I don’t know what to say. I just don’t feel
anything. When I think about it, I just don’t want to live. You are a clever man,
a brilliant man, and I ought to be overjoyed; but, instead, it makes me want to
die.”
That’s what she had said. But every morning she looked apprehensively for
any change in the way he behaved toward her.
She had said that. But she also said, “There are lots of girls in Moscow.
When autumn comes, you’ll meet a pretty one and stop loving me.”
She sometimes let him embrace her and even kiss her, but her lips and arms
were unresponsive.
“I’m so unhappy,” she said. “I used to believe that love was like a fiery angel
descending from heaven. But here we are; you love me, and I’ll never meet
anyone better, yet I’m not happy about it; I just don’t want to go on living.”
There was something of the retarded child about her. She was afraid of the
intimacies that bind husband and wife and would ask in a faint voice, “Is all
that necessary?”
“It certainly isn’t the most important thing,” Anton would answer earnestly.
“Most certainly not! It only supplements our spiritual union!”
That was when her lips first slackly responded to his kiss. “Thank you,” she
said. “If it weren’t so, life wouldn’t be worth living. I think I am beginning to
love you. I shall try as hard as I can to love you.”
That same autumn they were walking around the backstreets near Taganka
Square, and Agnia said in the low voice she used in the forest, which was
barely audible above the city traffic, “Do you want me to show you one of the
loveliest places in Moscow?”
She led him to the railings of a little brick church. It was painted white and
red, and its sanctuary abutted on a crooked lane without a name. There was
very little room inside the railings, only a narrow path around the church for
processionals, with barely room for priest and deacon side by side. The gentle
glow of altar candles and colored lamps could be seen through the barred
windows. In one corner of the precinct grew a huge old oak. Its yellowed
branches overshadowed both the dome and the lane, making the church look
tiny beside it.
“This is the Church of Nikita the Martyr,” Agnia said.
“But not the most beautiful place in Moscow.”
“Just wait.”
She took him through the gate. Oak leaves, yellow and orange, lay on the
flagstones of the yard. Almost in the shade of the oak stood an ancient
campanile with a hipped roof. This, and a little house belonging to the church
outside the precinct, obscured the low setting sun. An old beggar woman
bowed low before the open double doors on the north side, crossing herself as
the golden chant of evensong reached her.
“And that church was of wondrous beauty and radiance,” Agnia quoted,
almost in a whisper, her shoulder close to his.
“What century does it belong to?”
“Do you have to have a century? What do you think of it, anyway?”
“It’s pretty, of course, but not all that—”
“Look now, then!” Agnia’s outstretched hand quickly drew Anton farther on,
to the portico outside the main door; they emerged from the shadow into the
stream of light from the setting sun and sat on the low stone parapet, beside the
churchyard gate.
Anton gasped. It was as though they had soared free from the narrow ravine
of the city and come out on a steep eminence with an open view far into the
distance. The portico swept down through the gap in the parapet to a long
course of white stone steps, several flights of them, alternating with little
landings and descending down the hillside to the Moscow River. The river
was on fire in the light of the setting sun. To their left Zamoskvoreche dazzled
them with the yellow brilliance of its windows; straight ahead the black
chimneys of the Moscow Power Station poured smoke into the glowing sky;
almost directly under them the glittering Yauza flowed into the Moscow, with
the orphanage to the right beyond it, and beyond that the fretted contours of the
Kremlin; while still farther away the five red-gold domes of the Church of
Christ the Savior blazed in the sun.
And in all this golden radiance Agnia sat with a yellow shawl around her
shoulders, screwing up her eyes at the sun and looking golden herself.
Anton, carried away, could only say, “Yes! That’s . . . Moscow!”
“How cleverly Russians chose sites for churches and monasteries in ancient
times,” Agnia said with a catch in her voice. “I’ve been down the Oka and the
Volga, and wherever you go, they’re built in the most imposing places. The
architects were God-fearing; the masons were righteous men.”
“Yes . . . Yes . . . That’s . . . Moscow. . . !”
“But it’s going, Anton,” she cried. “Moscow is going!”
“Going? Going where? You’re imagining things.”
“They’re going to demolish this church, Anton,” she insisted.
“How do you know?” he asked angrily. “It’s an architectural monument;
they’ll let it stand.”
He looked at the little bell tower and the oak branches peeking through its
apertures.
“They’ll pull it down!” Agnia prophesied confidently, still sitting motionless
in her yellow shawl in the yellow light.
No one in Agnia’s family had taught her to believe in God. On the contrary.
In the days when churchgoing was the rule, Agnia’s grandmother and mother
had not gone, not observed fasts, had turned their noses up at priests, and
whenever possible ridiculed the religion that had lived so cozily side by side
with serfdom. Agnia’s grandmother, mother, and aunts had their own sturdy
creed: always to be on the side of those who are harried, hunted, oppressed,
persecuted by the powers that be. Her grandmother, it seemed, had been known
to all the Moscow members of the People’s Will Party; she gave them shelter
and helped them in every way she could. Her daughters had taken over from
her and hidden underground Socialist Revolutionaries and Social Democrats.
Little Agnia always felt for the hare that might be shot and the horse that might
be whipped. But as she grew up, her sympathies took a direction that her
elders could never have expected: She was for the church because it was
persecuted.
She insisted that “in our day and age” it would be base in her to shun the
church, and to the horror of her mother and grandmother, she began attending
regularly and found herself enjoying the services.
“What makes you say the church is persecuted?” Anton asked in surprise.
“Nobody stops them ringing their bells and baking their altar bread and having
their processions. Let them carry on, by all means, but they aren’t really
wanted in the cities and the schools.”
“Of course it’s persecuted.” Agnia’s voice never rose above a murmur in
disagreement. “When people say and print anything they like about the church
and never give it a chance to defend itself, when they confiscate the altar
furnishings and exile priests, don’t you call that persecution?”
“Have you ever seen a priest banished?”
“It isn’t something you see in the streets.”
Anton pressed harder.
“And what if it is persecuted? Say the church has been persecuted for ten
years. For how long did the church do the persecuting? Ten centuries?”
“I wasn’t alive then,” said Agnia, shrugging her narrow shoulders. “I have to
live here and now. I see what is happening in my own lifetime.”
“But everybody ought to know a little history! Ignorance is no excuse!
Haven’t you ever wondered why our church managed to survive the 250 years
of the Tatar yoke?”
“Because its faith was deep? Because Orthodoxy proved spiritually stronger
than Mohammedanism?”
It was a question, not an assertion.
Anton smiled indulgently.
“What a dreamer you are! Do you really think that the soul of our country
was ever Christian? In the thousand years of its existence, did we ever really
forgive our oppressors? Did we ever ‘love them that hate us’? Our church
endured because after the Tatar invasion Metropolitan Cyril paid homage to the
khan—the first Russian to do so—and begged from him guarantees of safety for
the clergy. How did the Russian clergy safeguard its lands, its slaves, and its
cult? Why, with the Tatar sword! And, if you like, Metropolitan Cyril was
right, a political realist. That’s the way to be. That’s the only way to come out
on top.”
Agnia never argued when she was challenged. She looked at her fiancé with
wide-eyed bewilderment, as though she saw him for the first time.
“That’s what all those beautiful churches with their cleverly chosen sites
were built on!” Anton thundered. “And on schismatics burned at the stake! And
on sectarians flogged to death! Persecuted church! Don’t waste your sympathy
on it!”
He sat down beside her on the sun-warmed stone of the parapet.
“And anyway, you aren’t fair to the Bolsheviks. You’ve never taken the
trouble to read their most important books. They show the greatest respect and
concern for world culture. They stand for an end to the tyranny of man over
man, for the empire of reason. Above all, they are for equality! Imagine it:
universal, total, absolute equality. No one will be more privileged than anyone
else. No one will enjoy special advantages, either in income or in position.
What could be more attractive than a society like that? Isn’t it worth making
sacrifices for?”
(Attractions apart, Anton’s origins had made it necessary to join the right
side before it was too late.)
“All these frivolous notions of yours will stand in your way; you’ll never get
into an institute. And what’s the use of your protests, anyway? What can you
do?”
“What can a woman ever do?” Her thin braids (nobody wore braids
anymore; everybody had bobbed hair, but she went on wearing them in the
spirit of contradiction, although they did not suit her) had flown apart. One
hung down her back; the other lay on her breast. “All that a woman is capable
of is deterring a man from great deeds. Even women like Natasha Rostova. I
can’t stand her.”
“Why?” Anton was staggered.
“Because she wouldn’t let Pierre join the Decembrists!”
* Her weak voice
broke again.
She seemed to be made of nothing but surprises.
The transparent yellow shawl had slipped down over her bent elbows and
looked like a pair of delicate golden wings.
Anton gently, as though afraid he might break it, clasped his hands around
one elbow.
“And you? Would you have let him?”
“Yes.”
Anton, however, saw no heroic feat ahead of him for which he would need to
seek release. It was the busiest time of his life, his work was interesting, and
his prospects excellent.
Belated worshippers who had climbed from the embankment went past,
crossing themselves when they saw the open door of the church. The men took
their caps off as they entered the precinct. But there were far fewer men than
women, and no young people.
“Aren’t you afraid of being seen near a church?” Agnia had not meant it
sarcastically, but that was how it sounded.
It was, indeed, already dangerous, as it would be for many years ahead, to be
noticed by a colleague anywhere near a church, and Anton felt too conspicuous
for comfort.
He was beginning to get irritated.
“You must be careful, Agnia,” he warned her. “We must know how to
recognize the new in good time. Anyone who doesn’t will be hopelessly out of
date. You have begun to feel drawn to the church because it sanctifies your
aversion to life. Get a grip on yourself! Force yourself to take an interest in
something, if it’s only in the process of living.”
Agnia drooped. The hand with Anton’s gold ring hung limply. The girl’s
figure looked bonier, thinner than ever.
“Yes, yes,” she said in a sinking voice. “I realize perfectly well at times that
living is very difficult for me, that I just don’t want to live. The world has no
place for people like me.”
Something snapped inside him. She was doing everything she could to make
herself unattractive to him! His resolve to keep his promise and marry Agnia
was weakening.
She looked up at him, searching his face, unsmiling.
And she isn’t really pretty, Anton thought.
“You can probably look forward to fame and success and prosperity,” she
said sadly. “But will you be happy, Anton? You must take care, too. When we
get interested in the process of living, we lose . . . we lose . . . how can I put
it?” She rubbed fingers and thumb together, feeling for the word. She looked
sick with anxiety.
“Once the bell stops ringing, once the tuneful sounds fade, you can never call
them back. But all the music is in them. Do you understand?”
She was still struggling to find words.
“Imagine yourself dying and suddenly asking for an Orthodox funeral. . . .”
Then she insisted on going inside to pray. He couldn’t walk off and leave her
there alone. They went in. Under a vaulted ceiling a gallery with windows
latticed in the Old Russian style ran around the church.
Through the little windows the setting sun flooded the church with light and
spilled shimmering gold on the top of the icon stand and a mosaic of the Lord
of Hosts.
There were few worshippers. Agnia set a thin candle on a big copper stand
and stood, grave and still, except for a perfunctory sign of the cross, her hands
folded over her chest, staring, rapt, before herself. The diffused glow of the
sunset and the orange reflections of candlelight had brought life and warmth
back to Agnia’s cheeks.
It was two days before the Nativity of the Mother of God, and they were
reciting the litany of the day. It was an inexhaustibly eloquent outpouring of
praise for the Virgin, and Yakonov felt for the first time the overwhelming
poetic power of such prayers. The canon had been written not by a soulless
dogmatist but by some great poet immured in a monastery, and he had been
moved not by a furious excess of male hunger for a female body but by the pure
rapture that a woman can awake in us.
YAKONOVCAME TO HIS SENSES. He was sitting on a pile of sharp stone
fragments from the portico of the Church of Nikita the Martyr, soiling his
leather coat.
Yes, they had wantonly destroyed the bell tower with the hipped roof and
smashed the stone steps down to the river. It was impossible to believe that the
golden evening he had remembered and this December dawn had happened on
the same few square meters of Moscow soil. But the view from the hill was as
spacious as ever, and the river still wound its way between two (now dimmed)
rows of streetlamps. . . .
. . . SHORTLYAFTERWARD HE HAD GONE ABROAD on official business. When
he got back, he had been told to write—which meant little more than putting his
name to—a newspaper article about the decadence of the West, its social
system, its morals, its culture, about the disastrous condition of the Western
intelligentsia, and about the impossibility of new scientific discoveries in that
part of the world. It wasn’t true, but it was not altogether false. There were
facts to support these assertions, but there were other facts, too. The Party
Committee sent for him—he was not a Party member—and was very insistent.
Hesitation on Yakonov’s part could have aroused suspicion, left a blot on his
reputation. And anyway, what harm could such a piece do to anyone? Europe
would surely be none the worse for it.
His travel notes were written. Agnia sent his ring back in a postal package,
to which she had tied with cotton thread a scrap of paper with the words “To
Metropolitan Cyril.”
And he had felt relieved.
HE ROSE, hauled himself up to a latticed window of the gallery, and peered in.
From inside there was a smell of damp brickwork, cold, and decay. His eyes
dimly discerned more heaps of broken stone and rubbish.
Yakonov drew back from the window. He felt his heartbeat slowing down
and leaned against the jamb of a rusty iron door unopened for many years.
Abakumov’s threat welled up in him like an icy wave of fear.
YAKONOVWAS ATTHE SUMMIT of what looked like power. He was a high
official of a mighty ministry. He was clever and talented, and his cleverness
and talent were widely recognized. At home a loving wife and two charming
little girls, rosily sleeping, awaited his return. The upper rooms, with balcony,
of an old Moscow building constituted his excellent apartment.
His monthly salary came to many thousands. A personal Pobeda could
always be summoned by phone.
But he stood there, his elbows resting on dead stones, and he did not want to
live. His soul was so empty of hope that he had not the strength to stir hand or
foot. He was not moved to look around at the beauty of the morning.
It was getting light.
There was a solemn purity in the chilly air. A shaggy coat of hoarfrost had
furred the enormous stump of the felled oak, the cornices of the half-ruined
church, the intricately patterned lattices of its windows, the wires that ran
down to the little house nearby, and the top of the long fence circling the site of
a future skyscraper.
* Decembrists: Revolutionaries who in December 1825 rebelled against Tsar
Nicholas I as he succeeded Tsar Alexander I to the throne. Although they were
easily routed in a showdown in St. Petersburg, their gesture of defiance
inspired subsequent generations of Russian revolutionaries.