Chapter-21-Give-Us-Back-the-Death-Penalty!

HARDLYANYONE DARED CALL HIM SASHA to his face or even to think of him
by that name. It had to be Aleksandr Nikolaevich. “Poskryobyshev rang” meant
“The Boss rang.” “Poskryobyshev has ordered” meant “The Boss has
ordered.” Poskryobyshev had lasted more than fifteen years as head of Stalin’s
personal secretariat. It was a long time, and anyone who did not know him
well might marvel that his head had not rolled. His secret was simple: He was
at heart an officer’s servant, and he had entrenched himself in his job by acting
accordingly. Even when he was made a lieutenant general, a member of the
Central Committee, and head of the Special Department for Surveillance of
Members of the Central Committee, he was incapable of imagining himself as
less of a nonentity in comparison with the Boss. “To your native village,
Soplyaki” (“Wimps’ home”), the Boss would say, and he would clink glasses
with a complacent giggle. Stalin’s nose for such things never let him down, and
in Poskryobyshev he scented neither doubt nor contumacy.
But in his dealings with his juniors, this homely, balding courtier acquired
enormous importance. When he spoke to underlings over the telephone, his
voice was the faintest whisper; you had to ram your head into the receiver to
hear anything. You could occasionally share a little joke with him on matters of
no moment, but ask how things were in there today? Your tongue would go on
strike.
On this occasion Poskryobyshev told Abakumov:
“Iosif Vissarionovich is working. He may not want to see you. He gave
orders for you to wait.”
Relieving Abakumov of his briefcase (it had to be handed over before you
went in to the Man), Poskryobyshev escorted him into the waiting room and
went away.
Abakumov had not ventured to ask what he most wanted to know: what sort
of mood the Boss was in today. He was left alone in the waiting room, his
heart pounding.
This large, powerfully built, and strong-willed man, whenever he found
himself there, felt faint with dread, just like any ordinary citizen at the height of
the Terror listening in the night hours for footsteps on the stairs. His ears
became ice cold, then filled with blood and became red hot, and whenever this
happened, Abakumov feared that his continually burning ears would arouse the
Boss’s suspicion. The least little thing made Stalin suspicious. He did not, for
instance, like people to put their hands into inside pockets in his presence. So
Abakumov transferred to his breast pocket the two fountain pens he had ready
to take notes.
Beria was the channel for day-to-day management of State Security, and it
was from him that Abakumov generally received his instructions. But once a
month the Autocrat liked to sample in the flesh the man to whom he entrusted
the defense of the world’s most advanced social order.
Those interviews, an hour at a time, were the heavy price which Abakumov
paid for all his power, all his high-and-mightiness. He lived, he enjoyed life,
only from one interview to the next. When the appointed time came, his heart
died within him; his ears turned to ice; he handed over his briefcase not
knowing whether he would ever get it back; he bowed his bull head at Stalin’s
office door, uncertain whether he would be able to raise it in an hour’s time.
What made Stalin terrifying was that any slip in dealing with him was like
mishandling a detonator: You would do it only once in your life; there was no
chance to correct it. What made Stalin terrifying was that he never listened to
excuses; he did not even make accusations. One end of his mustache twitched
slightly, and sentence was passed somewhere inside there, but the condemned
man was not informed of it; he went peacefully on his way, was arrested that
night and shot before morning.
Worst of all was when Stalin said nothing and you were left to torment
yourself with conjecture. If Stalin threw something heavy or sharp at you,
stamped on your foot, spat at you, or blew hot tobacco ash in your face, his
anger was not final; it would pass! If Stalin was rude and abused him, even in
the most obscene language, Abakumov rejoiced; that meant that the Boss still
hoped to reform his minister and to go on working with him.
By now, of course, Abakumov realized that excess of zeal had carried him
too high for comfort; he would have been safer lower down. Stalin was always
pleasant and affable when he talked to peripheral people. But you couldn’t
break out of the inner circle; there was no way back.
All you had to look forward to was death. Of natural causes. Or . . . best not
to mention it.
So whenever he reported to Stalin, Abakumov lived in fear of being found
out.
What if it became known that he had used his position in Germany to line his
pockets? That thought alone kept him shivering in his shoes.
At the end of the war Abakumov had been head of SMERSH (the “Death to
Spies” organization). All counterespionage units in all front-line army groups
came under his command. For a time it was possible to enrich yourself
undetected. To help finish Germany off completely, Stalin adopted Hitler’s
idea of permitting those at the front to send parcels home. Fight for the honor of
the motherland? Fine. For Stalin? Better still. But shouldn’t the fighting man be
given some personal, material interest in victory? Say, the right to send home
the spoils of war, rankers five kilograms a month, officers ten, generals a
pood?
* (This gradation was fair, because a soldier’s pack must not weigh him
down on the march, whereas a general always has his car.) But the
counterespionage network was in a much more advantageous situation. It was
out of reach of enemy shells. It was safe from enemy bombers. SMERSH’s life
was lived just behind the front line, in the zone that was no longer under fire
but not yet invaded by treasury officials. Its officers were shrouded in a cloud
of secrecy. Nobody would dare inquire what they had put in a sealed freight
car, what they had removed from a sequestered estate, what their sentries were
there to guard. Trucks, trains, and airplanes carried off the riches amassed by
SMERSH’s officers. Lieutenants shipped out thousands, colonels hundreds of
thousands, and Abakumov raked in millions.
He did not, of course, imagine for a moment that gold, even deposited in a
Swiss bank, would save him if he lost his ministerial post or if the regime he
served collapsed. But he could not watch his subordinates getting rich while he
took nothing for himself. Such self-denial was more than flesh and blood could
bear. So he sent out search parties, one after another. Even two cases full of
men’s suspenders were more than he could resist. He looted automatically, like
a man under hypnosis.
This treasure of the Nibelungs brought Abakumov not affluent ease but the
constant dread of exposure. None of those in the know would dare denounce
the all-powerful minister, but the merest chance might destroy him. He had
derived no benefit from what he had taken, but he could hardly declare it to the
Ministry of Finance now!
He had arrived at 2:30 a.m., but at 3:10 he was still pacing the waiting room
restlessly, with his big empty notebook in his hand, faint with fear, and with
those telltale burning ears. Only one thing could make him happy now: that
Stalin would feel overworked and unable to see him. Abakumov was afraid
that he would be punished for the secret telephone. He did not know what lie to
tell next.
At last the heavy door slowly opened, halfway. Quietly, almost on tiptoe,
Poskryobyshev stepped into the gap and speechlessly beckoned. Abakumov
followed, trying not to put his big broad feet down heavily. He inserted his
trunk into the next half-open door, steadying it with one hand on the polished
bronze handle.
He paused on the threshold and said, “Good evening, Comrade Stalin! May I
come in?”
He had foolishly forgotten to clear his throat, so that his voice sounded
hoarse and insufficiently obsequious.
Stalin was writing at his desk, in a tunic with gilded buttons and several
rows of ribboned medals but without epaulets. He finished a sentence and only
then raised his head to look at the new arrival with owlish malignity. Without
speaking.
A very bad sign! Not a word.
And he resumed his writing.
Abakumov closed the door behind him but dared go no farther without a nod
or gesture of invitation. He stood with his long arms hanging straight at his
sides, bending slightly forward, a respectful smile of greeting on his fleshy
lips, but his ears were aflame.
No one had used this simplest of interrogator’s ploys, greeting a man’s entry
with hostile silence, more often than the Minister of State Security. But familiar
as it was, when Stalin received him like that, Abakumov was ready to collapse
in terror.
In Stalin’s night study, a small, low-ceilinged room, there were no pictures
or ornaments, and the windows were tiny. The low walls were oak-paneled,
and a few bookshelves ran along one of them. The desk stood near to but clear
of one wall. There was a record player with a radio in one corner, with
records on a set of shelves beside it. Stalin enjoyed listening to his old
speeches in the night hours.
Abakumov waited, bent double in supplication.
Yes, he was completely in the hands of the Leader, but up to a point the
Leader was in his hands, too. Just as in battle, if one side advances too
impetuously, the armies interlock, each outflanks the other, and you cannot be
sure who is surrounding whom, so here: Stalin had locked himself (and the
whole Central Committee) into the State Security system; everything he wore,
ate, drank, sat on, lay on was provided by MGB people, and the MGB alone
now guarded him. So that in some freakish ironical sense, Stalin was
Abakumov’s subordinate. Only it was not very likely that Abakumov could
successfully assert his authority first.
Bowed low, the hefty minister stood and waited. While Stalin went on
writing. Whenever Abakumov entered that room, Stalin would be sitting and
writing like that. It was as though he never left the spot, never stopped writing,
imposingly, authoritatively, so that every word that flowed from his pen at once
hardened into history. A desk lamp shed light on his papers; the rest of the
room was only faintly lit by concealed overhead lights. This time Stalin paused
occasionally, leaned back in his chair, and squinted sideways at the floor. He
gave Abakumov a dark look, as though he were trying to hear something,
although there was not a sound in the room.
Where does it come from, that commanding manner, that way of endowing
every little movement with significance? The finger movements, the gestures,
the raised eyebrows, the intent gaze, were no doubt those of the young Koba.
But in him none of this had frightened people; no one had read into these
movements a terrible meaning. Only when holes enough had been made in the
backs of heads did people begin to see in the Leader’s slightest movement a
hint, a warning, a threat, an order. Noticing other people’s reactions, Stalin
started observing himself, discerned the latent menace in his gestures and
glances, and began consciously cultivating them so that they became still more
predictable in their effect on those around him.
At last Stalin looked grimly at Abakumov and showed him with a jab of his
pipe where he was to sit.
Abakumov sprang happily to life, stepped lightly forward, and sat down, but
only on the front half of the chair. He was not at all comfortable, but it would
be easier to stand up should he need to.
“Well?” asked Stalin brusquely, glancing at his papers.
The moment had come! He must take care now not to lose the initiative.
Clearing his throat with a little cough, Abakumov began speaking rapidly,
almost enthusiastically. He would curse himself later for his verbose eagerness
to please, for the reckless promises made in Stalin’s office, but he could not
help it. It was always the same: The more unfriendly the reception, the rasher
Abakumov was in his assurances to the Boss—and the more extravagant his
promises.
The beauty of Abakumov’s nocturnal reports, their main attraction for Stalin,
was that they always uncovered some very important and widely ramified
hostile group. Abakumov never turned up to report without the news that some
such group had been rendered harmless. As usual, he had such a group (at the
Frunze Academy) in readiness and could fill much of the time with details.
But he began by describing progress (real or fictitious he did not know
himself) in the preparations to assassinate Tito. He said that a time bomb
would be put on board Tito’s yacht before it sailed for Brioni.
Stalin looked up, stuck his dead pipe in his mouth, and made it gurgle twice.
He showed no further interest, but Abakumov, who could sometimes read his
chief’s mind, felt that he had hit the spot.
“What about Rankovich?” Stalin asked.
Of course, of course! They must choose a moment when Rankovich, Kardelj,
Moshe Pijade—the whole gang—could be blown sky-high together! According
to his calculations it was bound to happen no later than next spring! (When the
bomb went off, the yacht’s crew would die as well, but the minister did not
mention this trivial fact, and his interlocutor did not inquire.)
But what were his thoughts as he sat blowing into his pipe and staring at his
minister expressionlessly over his pendulous nose?
Not, of course, the thought that the Party he led had been born rejecting
terrorist acts against individuals. Nor yet the thought that he himself had
thrived on terrorism all his life. Breathing noisily into his pipe and staring at
that overfed, rosy-cheeked bullyboy with the burning ears, Stalin was thinking
what he always thought when he saw subordinates so mettlesome, so ready for
anything, so eager to please. Indeed, it was not so much a thought as an
instinctive reaction: How far can this man be trusted today? And with it,
automatically: Has the time come to sacrifice this man?
Stalin knew very well that Abakumov had lined his pockets in 1945. But he
was in no hurry to punish him. It suited Stalin that Abakumov was what he was.
Such men were easier to manage. In the course of a lifetime Stalin had found
that the people to be treated with the greatest caution were men of principle,
so-called, like Bukharin. They were the nimblest of tricksters, difficult to trip
up.
But even the transparent Abakumov was no more to be trusted than anyone
else on this earth.
Stalin had not trusted his own mother. Nor God. Nor his Revolutionary
comrades. Nor the peasants (you couldn’t trust them to sow and get the harvest
in unless you forced them). Nor the workers (who wouldn’t work unless norms
were set for them). Still less did he trust the engineers. He had not trusted his
soldiers and generals to fight without punitive battalions and security
detachments to cut off their retreat. He never trusted his henchmen. He had not
trusted his wives and mistresses. Even his children he had not trusted. And he
had always been proved right!
There was one man he had trusted, and only one, in a life free of trust and
mistakes. In the eyes of the world, that man had seemed so firm in friendship
and in enmity, he had swung around so sharply and held out his hand in
friendship. This was no windbag; this was a man of action!
And Stalin had believed him!
That man was Adolf Hitler.
Stalin had looked on with approval and malicious glee while Hitler
dismembered Poland, France, Belgium, while his planes blackened the skies
over England. Molotov came back from Berlin in a fright. There were
intelligence reports that Hitler was concentrating troops in the East. Hess fled
to England. Churchill warned Stalin that he was about to be attacked. Every
rook on the aspens of Belorussia and the poplars of Galicia screeched
warnings of war. Every market woman in Stalin’s own country prophesied war
from one day to the next. Stalin alone was unperturbed. He went on sending
trainloads of raw materials to Germany and did nothing to fortify his frontiers,
for fear of offending his colleague.
Hitler he had believed!
And this faith had very nearly cost him his head.
Which was one more reason why he now believed absolutely nobody!
Abakumov could have answered this overbearing distrust with bitter words
but dared not utter them. Stalin shouldn’t have played at Trojan horses! He
shouldn’t have sent for that fathead Popivoda to discuss anti-Tito pamphlets.
Shouldn’t have turned down those splendid fellows handpicked by Abakumov
to kill the bear, men who knew the language, knew the country’s ways, even
knew Tito by sight. Stalin shouldn’t have turned them down after a look at their
dossiers (anybody who’s lived abroad is not one of us); he should have trusted
them and given them the job. Abakumov himself was angered by this inertia.
But he knew his Boss! You must devote a proportion of your powers to his
service, more than half but not the whole. Stalin would not tolerate open
noncompliance. But excessively efficient performance he hated; he saw in it an
insidious threat to his uniqueness. Nobody but he must know or understand or
do things perfectly!
So Abakumov, like the other forty-five ministers, kept up a show of exertion
in ministerial harness but pulled with only half his shoulder power.
Just as Midas turned all that he touched to gold, so Stalin turned all that he
touched to lead.
Today, though, Stalin’s face brightened as Abakumov proceeded with his
report. After a detailed account of the proposed bomb blast, the minister went
on to report arrests at the Ecclesiastical Academy, then with minute
particularity the business at the Frunze Academy, then the results of espionage
in South Korean ports.
Duty and common sense demanded that he should now report the telephone
call to the American Embassy the day before. But he could say nothing. He
could assume that Beria or Vyshinsky had already reported it. It might be best
to behave as if he had not yet been told of it himself. It was precisely because
Stalin trusted nobody and encouraged duplication that every draft animal
pulled half-heartedly. For the moment it would pay him not to be in a hurry
with promises to find the culprit with the aid of the new technology. He was
doubly afraid to use the word “telephone” just then; it might remind Stalin of
the secret telephone. Abakumov even tried not to look at the telephone on the
desk, in case his eyes drew the Boss’s attention to it.
Stalin was obviously trying to remember something right then! Perhaps the
secret telephone! His brow puckered in deep folds, his fleshy nose tensed, he
stared hard at Abakumov (the minister did his utmost to look honest and
guileless), but he could not remember! The thought half glimpsed slipped back
into a black hole. The creases in his gray brow relaxed impotently.
Stalin sighed, filled his pipe, and lit it.
“Oh, yes!” The first puff had reminded him of something, but something
incidental, not the important thing he had been trying to recall. “Is Gomulka
under arrest?”
Gomulka had recently been dismissed from all the posts he held in Poland,
missed his footing and slid into the abyss.
Abakumov confirmed that Gomulka had indeed been arrested, rising slightly
from his chair in his relief. (Stalin had in fact been informed earlier.)
Stalin pressed a button on his desk to switch from the overhead light to
several wall-lights. He rose and began to pace the floor, puffing at his pipe.
Abakumov understood that no further report was required and that instructions
would now be dictated. He opened the big notebook on his knees, got out his
pen, and prepared to write (the Boss liked his words to be taken down
immediately).
But Stalin walked over to the record player and back, puffing away, without
saying a word, as though he had completely forgotten Abakumov. His gray,
pockmarked face grew grim in a tortured effort to remember. Looking at him in
profile as he passed, Abakumov saw that the Boss’s shoulders were bowed,
that his back was hunching, which made him appear smaller than he was, quite
small in fact. Abakumov found himself conjecturing (he usually suppressed
such thoughts in this place, in case the Highest somehow sensed them) that the
Boss would not live another ten years. He was going to die, and although it
might not be very wise of him, Abakumov wanted it to be soon; for all of them,
Stalin’s henchmen, it would surely be the beginning of an easier, freer life.
Stalin meanwhile was depressed by yet another lapse of memory; his head
was refusing to work for him! On the way here from his bedroom he had been
thinking of one particular question he needed to ask Abakumov, and now he
had forgotten it. Helplessly, he tried frown after frown, struggling to remember.
Then suddenly he threw back his head, looked at the top of the opposite wall,
and remembered, not what he needed to remember now but what he had been
unable to remember two nights ago in the Museum of the Revolution, much to
his annoyance at the time.
. . . It had happened in ’37. Before the twentieth anniversary of the
Revolution, when so much had changed in the way it was presented, he had
decided to inspect the exhibition for himself and make sure that they had gotten
nothing wrong. In one room, the one in which a huge television set now stood,
the scales suddenly fell from his eyes, and he saw high up on the wall facing
him big portraits of Zhelyabov and Perovskaya. Their faces were bold,
fearless, their gaze implacable: They called on all who entered to “kill the
tyrant.”
The gaze of the two “People’s Will” leaders went through him, like two
arrows through his throat. He recoiled, he croaked, he choked, and, choking,
pointed a shaking finger at the pictures.
They were taken down at once. And in Leningrad the first holy relic of the
Revolution, the wreckage of Alexander II’s carriage, was removed from the
museum.
Beginning that very day, Stalin ordered refuges and safe apartments to be
built for him in various places, sometimes riddling whole mountains with
passageways, as on the river Kholodnaya. Losing his taste for life in the
middle of a thickly populated city, he had ended up in this out-of-town villa,
this low-ceilinged night office close to his bodyguard’s orderly room.
The more people he relieved of their lives, the more he feared for his own.
His brain invented many valuable improvements in the security system, such
as, for instance, that the names of those on guard duty should be posted only
one hour before the guard was mounted, and that each squad should be made up
of soldiers from different barracks at a considerable distance from one
another; when they met on guard duty, they would be seeing each other for the
first time, and for twenty-four hours only, so that they would not be able to plot
anything. His villa had been built like a labyrinthine mousetrap. There were
three stockades, and their gates were not in line with one another. He had
arranged for himself a number of bedrooms, and his bed was made up at the
last moment, immediately before he retired.
All these precautions were dictated not by cowardice but by prudence.
Because his person was of inestimable value to the history of mankind. Other
people, however, might not realize this. And so as not to make himself a
conspicuous exception, he prescribed similar precautions for all the lesser
leaders, in the capital and in the provinces, forbade them to go to the bathroom
without attendants, ordered them to ride in a gaggle of three indistinguishable
vehicles. . . .
Painfully reminded of the Populist Revolutionaries’ portraits, he stood stockstill
in the middle of the room, looked around at Abakumov, and said, wagging
his pipe in the air: “What are you doing for the protection of Party cadres?”
Following it with a malignant look, a hostile look, screwing his head to one
side.
With his blank notebook open, Abakumov raised his behind from his chair in
deference to the Leader (but did not stand up, knowing that Stalin liked people
to keep still when they talked to him), and succinctly (because the Boss
considered lengthy explanations insincere) and unhesitatingly began talking
about something that he had not been expecting to talk about. (Ever-readiness
was most important in this context; Stalin might interpret any hesitation as
proof of malicious intent.)
“Comrade Stalin!” Abakumov’s feelings were hurt, and his voice trembled.
He yearned to use the more intimate “Iosif Vissarionovich,” but this form of
address was discouraged as presumptuous; no one must claim intimacy with
the Leader, put himself almost on the same level.
“What else do we, the security apparatus, exist for, what is our whole
ministry for, if not to make sure that you, Comrade Stalin, can work and think
and lead our country without anxiety?”
(Stalin had said “the safety of Party cadres,” but he wanted to hear only
about himself, and Abakumov knew it.)
“Not a day goes by without me checking, making the necessary arrests, taking
a good look at the situation!”
Stalin was still studying him closely, head on one side, like a doubtful raven.
“Tell me,” he asked thoughtfully. “Are there still cases of terrorism? Haven’t
we seen the end of them yet?”
Abakumov sighed deeply.
“I wish I could tell you that there are no cases of terrorism, Comrade Stalin.
But there are. We have to render them harmless . . . in the most unexpected
places.”
Stalin closed one eye, and his other expressed satisfaction.
“That’s good,” he said, nodding his head. “I can see you’re doing your job.”
“What is more, Comrade Stalin. . . .” Abakumov, rules or no rules, could not
bear to remain seated while the Leader stood, and he rose halfway from his
chair, without unbending his knees completely (he never went there in elevator
shoes). “What is more, we never let these things mature to the stage of actual
planning. We nip them in the bud while they’re still just a notion! We use
Section 19!”
“Good, good.” With a soothing gesture Stalin waved Abakumov back to his
seat (he didn’t want that great hulk looming over him). “So you think there are
still malcontents among the masses?”
Abakumov sighed again.
“Yes, Comrade Stalin. A certain percentage.”
(He would have looked pretty foolish if he had said there were none! If there
were none, who needed him and his entire organization?)
“You’re right,” Stalin said with feeling.
His voice was hoarse, wheezy, dull.
“I see you know your job at State Security. You know, some people tell me
there’s no discontent, everybody who votes in elections votes for us, so
everybody’s satisfied. What do you think of that?” Stalin grinned. “Political
blindness! The enemy hides his face, votes for us, but he is not content! Five
percent, would you say? Or maybe eight?”
(This perspicacity of his, this self-critical realism, this refusal to let the
incense go to his head, were qualities which Stalin particularly prized in
himself!)
“Yes, Comrade Stalin,” Abakumov replied with conviction. “Five percent.
Perhaps seven.”
Stalin continued his journey round the study, circling the desk en route.
“That is a weakness of mine, Comrade Stalin.” Abakumov was getting
bolder. His ears had cooled down. “I am incapable of complacency.”
Stalin gently tapped the ashtray with his pipe.
“What about the younger generation? What is their attitude?”
Answering these questions was like juggling with knives. . . . You only had to
cut yourself once. . . . Say “good,” and it would be “political blindness.” Say
“bad,” and you “lack faith in our future.”
Abakumov spread his fingers and refrained from speaking too soon.
Stalin did not wait for an answer. “We must show greater concern for the
young,” he said, his pipe tapping an emphatic accompaniment. “We must be
particularly hard on the bad habits of young people!”
Abakumov sat up and started writing.
Stalin was carried away by this thought, and his eyes lit up with a tigerish
gleam. He refilled his pipe, lit it, and began striding about the room much more
vigorously than before.
“You must intensify your observation of student attitudes! Weed out whole
groups, not just individuals! And you must go to the limit permitted by the law:
twenty-five years, not just ten! Ten is like sending them to school, not to prison!
Ten is fine for schoolboys. Once they start shaving, it’s twenty-five! They’re
young enough! They’ll survive!”
Abakumov scribbled. The first cogs in a complex machine began to turn.
“And you must put an end to the rest-cure conditions in political prisons! Is it
true what Beria tells me, that political prisoners get food parcels?”
Abakumov was pained. “We’ll eliminate them, Comrade Stalin! We’ll put a
stop to it!” he exclaimed, writing away. “That was a mistake on our part,
Comrade Stalin! I’m sorry!”
(It was indeed a blunder! He should have raised it himself!)
Stalin faced Abakumov, feet wide apart.
“How many times do I have to tell you? You ought to know by now. . . .”
He spoke without anger. His eyes, stern no longer, expressed his confidence
in Abakumov; he would learn the lesson, he would understand. Abakumov
could not remember Stalin ever speaking to him so simply and so kindly. His
feeling of apprehension had abandoned him; his brain was working like that of
a normal man in normal conditions. A departmental matter had been causing
him as much discomfort as a bone in his throat; out it came at last. His face
brightened.
“We do understand, Comrade Stalin.” (He spoke for the whole ministry).
“We do understand: The class struggle will continue to grow more acute! All
the more reason, then. . . . Put yourself in our position, Comrade Stalin. . . . We
are tied hand and foot in our work by the abolition of capital punishment!
We’ve been cudgeling our brains for two and a half years. . . . There’s no way
of documenting executions. So when somebody has to be shot, we must
produce two versions of the sentence. Then again, we can’t show the
executioners’ payment in the books, and our accounts get in a muddle. Besides,
we’ve got nothing to threaten them with in the camps. We badly need capital
punishment! Please, Comrade Stalin, give us back the death penalty!” A cry
from a loving heart. Abakumov pressed his palm to his breast and gazed
hopefully at his dark-faced Leader.
Stalin gave him perhaps the slightest of smiles. His bristling mustache
trembled, but not alarmingly.
“I know,” he said softly, understandingly. “I’ve been thinking about it.”
Amazing man! He knew everything! He thought of everything before he was
asked. Like a god hovering over them, he anticipated men’s thoughts.
“One of these days I will give you back the death penalty,” he said
thoughtfully, looking deep into the future, perhaps years and years ahead. “It
will be a useful educational measure.”
Of course he had been thinking about it! This past two years or so he had
regretted more than any of them that he had yielded to an impulse; to show off
to the West, he had been false to himself, behaved as if people were not rotten
through and through.
Yet all his life, that had been his distinctive characteristic as a statesman:
Neither dismissal, nor systematic harassment, nor confinement in a madhouse,
nor imprisonment for life, nor banishment, had ever seemed to him an adequate
way of dealing with persons known to be dangerous. Death was the only fully
reliable answer. Only the death of the criminal could confirm the reality and
fullness of your power.
If the tip of his mustache twitched indignantly, there was only one possible
sentence: death.
His scale included no lighter penalty.
Stalin withdrew his gaze from the bright distant future and turned it on
Abakumov. Squinting from beneath lowered lids, he asked: “But aren’t you
afraid you might be the first to be shot?”
The word “shot” remained almost unspoken; his voice sank to a faint
murmur, as if the thought went without saying.
But it chilled Abakumov to the core. His Dear Leader, his Beloved Leader,
stood over him, just out of reach of a straight punch, studying every little line in
the minister’s face, to see how he would take the joke.
Not daring either to stand or to remain seated, Abakumov raised himself
slightly on tensed legs, his knees trembling from the tension.
“Comrade Stalin! . . . If you think I deserve it. . . . If it’s necessary. . . .”
Stalin’s gaze was wise and penetrating. He was quietly turning over in his
mind the inevitable second thought about any of his henchmen. Alas, there was
a fatality which men could not defy: The most zealous of aides must sooner or
later be disowned and cast off. Sooner or later they all compromise
themselves.
“Quite right!” he said, with an indulgent smile, as though complimenting
Abakumov on his ready understanding. “When you deserve it, that’s when
we’ll shoot you.”
He waved his hand, urging Abakumov to sit down. Abakumov made himself
comfortable again.
Stalin thought awhile and then began speaking in a tone more friendly than
the Minister of State Security had heard from him before.
“There will be plenty of work for you shortly, Abakumov. We shall be
carrying out another exercise, like the one in 1937. The whole world is against
us. War has long been inevitable. Ever since 1944 it has been inevitable. And
before a great war there must be a great purge.”
Abakumov ventured a protest.
“But Comrade Stalin, aren’t we putting enough inside already?”
“You call that putting enough inside?” Stalin waved his hand, goodhumoredly
deprecating. “When we do start putting them away, you’ll really see
something! When the war comes and we move forward, we’ll start putting
Europe inside! Strengthen the Organs!
** Strengthen the Organs! All the staff
you need! Pay them what you like! I shall never refuse you!”
Then a benign dismissal.
“Right, off with you for now.”
ABAKUMOVDIDN’TKNOW whether he was walking or flying as he crossed the
waiting room to collect his briefcase from Poskryobyshev. He had a whole
month of life before him, and it might even be the beginning of a new era in his
relations with the Boss.
True, there had been a threat. He might be shot himself.
But of course that was only a joke.
* Pood: Pre-Revolutionary unit of weight equal to 36.11 pounds.
** Organs: A nickname for the Soviet secret police, with its vulgar double
entendre intended.