Chapter-74-Monday-Dawn

REVEILLE IN THE SHARASHKAWAS AT7:00 A.M.
But on Monday morning a guard entered the room where the laborers lived
long before reveille and shook the yardman by his shoulder. Spiridon gave one
loud snore, recovered consciousness, and looked at the guard in the dim light
from the blue bulb.
“Get dressed, Yegorov, the lieutenant wants you,” the guard said quietly.
Yegorov lay there open-eyed but did not stir.
“Didn’t you hear? I said the lieutenant wants you.”
“What’s up? Have you gone crazy or something?” Spiridon asked, still
without moving.
The guard shook him. “Get up now. Get up. Don’t ask me what it’s about.”
“Lord, oh Lord!” Spiridon stretched, put his ginger-haired hands behind his
head, and yawned lengthily. “Bring on the day when I don’t have to get up
anymore! What time is it?”
“Soon be six.”
“Not six yet?! . . . All right, you go. Needn’t wait.”
He went on lying there.
The guard hesitated, then left.
The blue lamp lit a corner of Spiridon’s pillow as far as the oblique shadow
of the upper bunk. Partly in the light, partly in shade, Spiridon lay with his
hands behind his head, motionless.
He was regretting that he had not seen the end of his dream.
He had been riding on a cart loaded with dry brushwood (and, under it, some
logs he had concealed from the forester). He seemed to be riding from the
forest back home to his house in the village but by an unfamiliar road. Though
he didn’t recognize the road, he saw clearly, with both eyes (they were both
good in his dream!), where bulging roots were breaking the surface, where
lightning had splintered a tree, where there were small pine needles or sand in
which wheels might sink and get stuck. Spiridon could also smell in his dream
the varied scents of early autumn, and he breathed them in greedily. Even in his
sleep he was acutely aware that he was a zek, that he was serving a sentence of
ten years with a five-year “collar,” that he seemed to have absented himself
from the sharashka, that they must have missed him by now but hadn’t yet sent
the dogs after him, so he must hurry up and get the firewood to his wife and
daughter.
But what most of all made it a happy dream was his horse—not any old
horse, but the best that Spiridon had ever owned, his roan mare Grivna, bought
as a three-year-old to work the little farm he had after the Civil War. Her coat
would have been all gray but for the bay underhair; gray and bay merged in a
color that could best be called pink. With this horse he had begun to prosper,
and he had put her between the shafts when he eloped with Marfa Ustinovna.
As he rode along now, Spiridon was surprised and delighted to find Grivna
still alive and as young as ever, hauling her load uphill with never a stumble
and struggling spiritedly through the sandy patches. Grivna’s thoughts always
showed in her sensitively pricked-up ears. She never looked back. A twitch of
her ears told her master that she knew what was wanted of her and could cope.
Even a distant glimpse of a whip would have been an insult to Grivna.
Spiridon left the whip behind when he was out with her.
In his dream he felt like getting down from the cart and kissing Grivna on her
muzzle, so overjoyed was he that she was still young and would obviously still
be alive and waiting when his sentence ended. But as they went down the slope
toward the stream, he realized that his cart was tilting to one side, that
branches were slipping off, and that the whole load threatened to collapse at
the ford.
A sudden jolt flung Spiridon to the ground, and it turned out to be the guard
shaking him.
He lay in bed remembering not only Grivna but dozens of horses he had
driven and worked with in his life (every one of them was etched on his
memory like a living person, as well as thousands he had seen elsewhere, and
it galled him to think how wantonly, against all reason, those best of helpers
had been exterminated, some starved to death for want of hay and oats, some
flogged to death while they worked, some sold to Tatars as meat). Anything at
all reasonable Spiridon could understand. But he could not understand why
they had done away with horses. They had tried to kid everybody that the
tractor would do the horse’s work. Instead, the whole burden had fallen on the
women.
It wasn’t just the horses, though. Hadn’t Spiridon himself chopped down fruit
trees on peasant farms so that the people there would have nothing to lose?
That way they’d give in more easily and join the collective.
“Yegorov!” This time the guard yelled at him from the doorway, waking two
other prisoners.
“I’m coming, blast you!” Spiridon yelled back, lowering his feet to the
ground. He wandered over to the radiator to retrieve his dry socks.
“Where are you off to, Spiridon?” his neighbor the blacksmith asked.
“Our masters are calling me. To earn my rations,” the yardman said angrily.
Spiridon was no slugabed at home, but in prison he didn’t like having to get
himself together in the dark. To be forced out of bed before it’s light is about
the worst thing that can happen to a prisoner.
But in the North Urals Camp they got you up at five. So it was best to grin
and bear it in the sharashka.
Spiridon adjusted his long army foot rags to cover the space between his
wadded trousers and army boots. Dressed and shod, he slipped into loose blue
overalls, shrugged on his black overcoat, donned his fur hat, buckled a frayed
canvas belt around his waist, and set off. He was let out through the steel door
of the prison and walked on unescorted. The steel tips on his shoes grated on
the concrete floor of the underground hallway. He climbed the narrow steps
into the yard.
Spiridon could see nothing in the snowy gloom, but his feet told him beyond
all doubt that something like eighteen inches of snow had fallen. So it must
have been snowing heavily all night. Kicking the snow as he went, Spiridon
made for the light over the staff room door.
At that moment, the duty officer—the lieutenant with the miserable little
mustache—appeared on the threshold of the administrative building. He had
left the medical assistant a little while ago to find the world untidy; snow had
fallen. So he had sent for the yardman. The lieutenant tucked both hands into
his belt and said, “All right, Yegorov, get on with it. Clear a path from the main
entrance to the guardhouse and from here to the kitchen. And another over
there, across the exercise yard. Get on with it.”
“If everybody has a bit, there’ll be nothing left for the husband,” Spiridon
muttered as he set off across the virgin snow with his shovel.
“What’s that you said?” the lieutenant asked angrily.
Spiridon looked around. “I said Jawohl, Boss, Jawohl.” (Which was what
he used to say when the Germans gave him orders.) “Tell them in the kitchen to
slip me a few potatoes.”
“All right. Get sweeping.”
Spiridon always behaved sensibly and avoided clashes with his bosses, but
on this occasion he felt particularly sore—because it was Monday morning,
because he was forced to slave away again before his eyes were really open,
because there was a letter from home waiting for him and he had a premonition
that it brought bad news. He felt a burning pain in his chest as the miseries of
fifty years on this earth crowded in on him.
The snow had stopped falling. The limes were breathlessly still, white not
with yesterday’s frost, which had vanished by suppertime, but with snow that
had fallen overnight. Spiridon judged by the darkness of the sky and the
stillness of the air that the snow would not hold.
He started sullenly, but once he had warmed up, after the first hundred
shovelfuls, the work went steadily and even enjoyably. Spiridon was like that,
and so was his wife; however heavy the troubles that weighed on them,
Spiridon and Marfa sought relief in work. And found it.
Disobeying orders, Spiridon did not begin by clearing a path from the
guardroom for the bosses. He used his own judgment and started with the path
to the kitchen, then made a circular track, three broad wooden shovelfuls wide,
around the exercise yard for his fellow zeks.
But his mind was on his daughter. His wife and he himself had lived their
lives. His sons were behind barbed wire, but they were men. “Young men
should get tough for when life becomes rough.” But his daughter. . . !
Although he had no sight in one eye and three-tenths vision in the other,
Spiridon had made an absolutely regular oval track around the exercise yard
by 7:00 a.m., when the first enthusiasts, Potapov and Khorobrov, had climbed
the steps from the basement, having risen and washed before reveille, to take
their morning exercise.
Fresh air was rationed and precious.
“What’s all this, Spiridon?” Khorobrov asked, turning up the collar of the
threadbare civilian overcoat in which he had been arrested all those years ago.
“Didn’t you get to bed last night?”
“D’you think those reptiles let a man sleep?” Spiridon replied. But he no
longer felt so angry. That hour of silent work had dispelled his dark thoughts
about his jailers. Without putting it into words, Spiridon knew in his heart that
if his daughter was in trouble through some fault of her own, that made things
no easier for her, and he must respond with kindness, not curse her.
Even this weighty thought about his daughter, which had come down to him
from the lime trees waiting rigidly for the dawn, was gradually pushed to the
back of his mind by the trivial concerns of the day: the two planks buried
somewhere under a snowdrift, the need to mount his brush on a sturdier
broomstick. . . .
First, though, he had to clear a path from the guardroom for cars and for the
free workers. Spiridon shouldered his shovel and disappeared around the
corner of the sharashka.
Sologdin, lithe and trim, with a padded jacket draped loosely round his
shoulders, which never felt the cold, went by, toward the woodpile. (When he
walked along like this, he often heard in his imagination a voice saying, “There
goes Count Sologdin.”)
After yesterday’s ludicrous wrangle with Rubin and Rubin’s exasperating
accusations, he had slept badly for the first time in the two years he had been in
the sharashka, and now he needed air and solitude and space to think it all
over. He had sawed wood ready; all he had to do was chop it.
Potapov was strolling around slowly with Khorobrov, lifting his wounded
leg stiffly. He was wearing the ordinary soldier’s overcoat he had worn as a
member of a tank crew in the assault on Berlin. (He had been an officer before
he was taken prisoner. Ex-POWs did not retain officer rank.)
Khorobrov had barely had time to shake off his drowsiness and wash, but his
mind was already alert for opportunities to vent the hatred that never slept in
him. The words bursting from his lips seemed to trace a futile loop in the dark
air and return like a boomerang to wound the speaker.
“Not so long ago, we used to read that the Ford conveyor belt turns the
worker into a machine and is the most inhuman form of capitalist exploitation.
But fifteen years later, the conveyor belt, under the novel name of the
‘continuous production line’ is extolled as the best and most modern mode of
production. Chiang Kai-shek was our ally in 1945, but his enemies succeeded
in overthrowing him in 1949, and now he is a reptile and his followers the
‘Chiang Kai-shek clique.’ Now they’re out to topple Nehru, and his regime is
described as ‘the rule of the big stick.’ If they succeed in bringing him down,
we will read about the ‘Nehru clique fleeing to the island of Ceylon.’ If they
don’t succeed, it will be ‘our noble friend Nehru.’ The Bolsheviks are such
shameless opportunists that if it suddenly proved necessary to convert all
Russia to Christianity again, they would unearth the appropriate passage from
Marx to show that it was compatible with atheism and internationalism.”
Potapov was always melancholy in the mornings. That was when he had time
to think about his ruined life, about a son growing up without a father and a
wife pining for her absent husband. Later on, his work would take his mind off
everything else.
Potapov thought that Khorobrov was probably right but that he was too
peevish and too ready to let the West sit in judgment of the Soviet Union.
Potapov himself believed that the Soviet people and the Soviet regime must
somehow—just how he did not know—settle their family quarrel themselves.
So, awkwardly dragging along his damaged leg, he walked on in silence,
breathing as deeply and evenly as he could.
Shattered by his meeting with his wife the day before, Gerasimovich had
stayed in bed all day on Sunday, as if sick. Her cry as she left had shaken him
badly.
He could no longer just wait quietly for his sentence to run its course. Those
last three years would be too much for Natasha. He had to do something about
it. “You could do something right now if you wanted to!” she had said
reproachfully, knowing how clever he was.
Yes, there was something he could use, but it was too precious to put into
those hands in return for crumbs from their table.
If only he could come up with something . . . something trivial, but enough to
earn him remission. But things don’t happen like that. Neither science nor life
gives us anything gratis.
He felt no better the next morning. It had cost him an effort to come out for
exercise. He was well wrapped up but chilled to the bone, and he wanted to go
back inside immediately. But he had run into Kondrashov-Ivanov, walked once
around the circuit with him, and was his captive for the rest of the exercise
period.
“What? You mean to say you don’t know about Pavel Dmitrievich Korin?”
Kondrashov sounded surprised, as if this was something every schoolboy
knew. “Well, well, well! They say he’s got this remarkable picture—only
nobody’s seen it—Vanishing Russia, it’s called. Some say it’s six meters,
some twelve. He’s kept on a tight rein, his work is never exhibited, he’s
painted this picture in secret, and when he dies, they’ll probably impound it.”
“Why, what does it show?”
“I only know what I’ve been told; I can’t vouch for it. It’s said to show an
ordinary road in central Russia, in a hilly place, with clumps of trees. People
are streaming along the road, looking preoccupied. Each individual is painted
in painstaking detail. The sort of faces we find in old family photographs but
don’t see around us anymore. Radiant Old Russian faces—peasants, plowmen,
craftsmen—with high foreheads and full beards, people whose complexions,
eyes, and thoughts were still clear and youthful in their seventies. The faces of
girls whose ears are protected from foul language by invisible golden
pendants, girls you couldn’t imagine in the Gadarene mob around the dance
floor. Dignified old women. Silver-haired priests walking along in their
vestments. Monks. Duma deputies. Overripe students in double-breasted
jackets. Schoolboys in quest of universal truths. Haughty beauties in earlytwentiethth-century
town clothes. Somebody greatly resembling Korolenko.
Then more peasants, and more, and more. . . . The most terrible thing is that
these people are not in separate groups! Chronological order no longer exists.
They are not talking to one another! They don’t look at one another; perhaps
they can’t even see one another. They carry no travelers’ bundles on their
backs. They simply . . . go on and on. And they’re not just walking along that
particular highway; they are walking away altogether. Departing. . . . We are
seeing the last of them. . . .”
Gerasimovich halted abruptly.
“I’m sorry, I must be alone for a while!”
He turned sharply on his heel, left the artist in mid-gesture, and walked off in
the opposite direction.
He felt feverish. Not only could he see the picture as vividly as if he had
painted it himself; he couldn’t help thinking that. . . .
Morning had set in.
A guard went around the yard shouting that the exercise period was over. As
they went in through the underground hallway, the other prisoners found
themselves jostling a morose Rubin, his grim beard emphasizing the sickly
pallor of his face. He was trying to push through in the opposite direction. He
had overslept and was too late not only for woodchopping (that was
unthinkable anyway after his quarrel with Sologdin) but for his morning
walkabout. After his brief, artificial sleep Rubin’s body was limp and numb.
He felt that hunger for oxygen that is unknown to those who can breathe freely
whenever they want. He was trying to fight his way out to the yard for a single
gulp of fresh air and a handful of snow to rub himself with.
But the guard standing at the head of the steps would not let him pass.
Rubin stood in the concrete pit down below. A little snow had found its way
down there, and there was a refreshing draft. He performed three slow,
circular movements with his arms, taking deep breaths, then collected some
snow from the floor of the pit, rubbed his face with it, and wandered back into
the prison.
Spiridon, now wide awake and very hungry after clearing a path for cars all
the way to the guardhouse, went the same way.
In the prison HQ the two lieutenants—the one with the two little squares of
mustache, who was going off duty, and the new arrival, Lieutenant Zhvakun—
opened a large envelope and studied the orders left for them by Major Myshin.
Lieutenant Zhvakun, a dense, fat-faced ruffian, had risen to the rank of
sergeant major during the war, serving as a divisional executioner (or, in the
official terminology, “executive officer attached to the military tribunal”), and
he had earned further promotion as a result. He greatly valued his position in
Special Prison No. 1, and since literacy was not his strong suit, he perused
Myshin’s instructions twice to be sure of getting them right.
At 8:50 the two of them went around the prisoners’ rooms to inspect and to
announce, as instructed: “All prisoners are to submit to Major Myshin in the
course of the next three days a list of their immediate relatives set out as
follows: number of relatives in list, name of relative (surname, given name,
patronymic), degree of affinity, place of work, home address. ‘Immediate
relatives’ means mother, father, legal wife, sons and daughters of a legal
registered marriage. Other relatives—brothers, sisters, aunts, nieces,
grandchildren, and grandmothers—do not count as immediate relatives. As of
January first, prisoners will be allowed to correspond with or receive visits
from immediate relatives as defined in this list and no one else.
“Furthermore, as of January first, the size of a prisoner’s monthly letter must
not exceed one double page of an exercise notebook.”
This order, so mean and inexorable, defied understanding. No exclamations
of despair or indignation sped Zhvakun on his way, only sarcastic cries of
“Happy New Year!” and “Cuckoo!”
“Denounce our relatives?”
“You mean the sleuths can’t find them?”
“Why doesn’t it say whether we should write in small letters or capitals?”
Zhvakun, counting heads, tried simultaneously to memorize who had shouted,
so that he could report them to the major.
Treat them well or treat them badly, prisoners are never satisfied.