Chapter-15-A-Girl!-A-Girl!

ATLASTEVEN ABRAMSON, who had served two sentences and learned all
about sharashkas the first time around, tired of murmuring. In two places
whispered stories were nearing their end. Somebody was snoring loudly,
horribly, sounding at times as if he was about to burst.
The blue light over the four-paneled door set in the vaulted entrance shed a
dim light on a dozen double bunks, fastened together in pairs and arranged
fanwise around the large semicircular room. This room, probably the only one
of its kind in Moscow, was twelve good masculine strides in diameter. Up
above, there was a spacious dome, at the base of a hexagonal tower. Around
the dome there were five elegant arched windows. The windows were barred
but not “muzzled” (fitted with inverted awnings), so that in daytime you could
see the wilderness that passed for a park on the other side of the highway, and
on summer evenings the plaintive singing of husbandless girls in a Moscow
suburb troubled the prisoners’ minds.
Nerzhin, on the top bunk by the central window, was not even trying to sleep.
Down below, Potapov, the engineer, had been sleeping the untroubled sleep of
an honest workingman for some time. On the next bunk to the left, the
moonfaced vacuum-tube expert, Zemelya, sprawled and snuffled contentedly,
with Pryanchikov’s empty bed beneath him, while to the right, on a bunk set
right against Nerzhin’s own, Ruska Doronin, one of the youngest zeks in the
sharashka, was sleeplessly tossing and turning.
As the conversation in Yakonov’s office receded, Nerzhin saw more and
more clearly that his refusal to join the cryptographic group was not just an
episode in his professional career but the turning point in his life as a whole. It
was bound to earn him, probably very soon, a long and grueling trek to
somewhere in Siberia or the Arctic. It would mean death—or victory over
death.
He needed to think about this abrupt change of direction. What had he
achieved during this three-year breathing space in the sharashka? Was he now
tough enough to stand being tossed back into the abyss of the camps?
As it happened, the following day was Gleb’s thirty-first birthday. (He did
not, of course, feel like reminding his friends of it.) Was he at the midpoint of
his life? Near the end? Just beginning?
His thoughts blurred. At one minute he found himself weakly imagining that it
was not too late; he could put things right, agree to join the cryptographers.
Then he began remembering his grievance—that they had kept postponing his
wife’s visit for eleven months now—and wondering whether they would let
him see her before he left.
But then his other self awoke and flexed its muscles. The breadlines of the
First Five-Year Plan had transformed a diffident boy into a different Nerzhin,
brash and defiant, and the life he had led since, especially in the camps, had
left him still tougher. His sturdy inner self was already busily calculating how
often he would be searched—as he left Marfino, on admission to Butyrki, on
admission to Krasnaya Presnya; how to conceal fragments of pencil lead in his
jacket; how to smuggle his old overalls out of the sharashka (every extra layer
is precious to a working stiff); how to prove that the aluminum teaspoon he had
carried around ever since he had been inside was his own, not stolen from the
sharashka, which had almost identical ones.
He even felt a restless urge to get up then and there, in the dim light, and
begin his preparations, start rearranging and hiding.
All this time Ruska Doronin kept impatiently changing his position. One
minute he was lying on his stomach, burying himself in his pillow, and pulling
the blanket over his head so that his feet were uncovered; the next he would be
flat on his back, flinging off the blanket and exposing a white bedspread and a
dingy sheet. (One of the two sheets was changed every bath day, but by
December the sharashka had overspent its yearly soap allowance, and bath day
was delayed.) Suddenly he sat up in bed, hoisted himself, pillow and all, up
against the iron back, and opened a hefty volume of Mommsen’s History of
Rome. Noticing that Nerzhin was awake and staring up at the blue bulb, Ruska
asked in a hoarse whisper:
“Gleb, have you got any cigarettes handy? Give me one.”
Ruska did not smoke as a rule. Nerzhin reached over to the pocket of his
overalls, which was hanging on the back of the bunk. He took out two
cigarettes, and they both lit up.
Ruska concentrated on his smoking and did not look at Nerzhin. His face,
which was always changing its expression—at one moment it was naive and
boyish, at the next the face of a trickster of genius—under its mop of unruly
dark-blond hair looked attractive even in the ghastly light from the blue bulb.
“Here,” said Nerzhin, putting an empty Belomor pack where Ruska could use
it as an ashtray.
They tapped their ash into it.
Ruska had been in the sharashka since summer. Nerzhin took an immediate
liking to him and felt an urge to protect him.
But it was soon evident that Ruska, though only twenty-three (and with
twenty-five years of imprisonment hanging over him), needed no protector. His
character and outlook had been fully formed by the vicissitudes of a short but
turbulent life—not so much by his four weeks of university education, two in
Moscow, two in Leningrad, as by two years on the run, with forged documents
and the whole Soviet police force on his trail (he had sworn Gleb to absolute
secrecy when he told him), and most recently by two years of prison. With his
gift of instant mimicry, he had quickly mastered the wolfish law of the Gulag:
He was always on his guard and confided in very few people, though on the
surface he was childishly candid. He was feverishly active and tried to pack a
great deal into a short time. Reading was just one of his many activities.
Gleb, wearying of his muddled thoughts, was still not ready for sleep and
judged that Ruska was even less so. He whispered a question in the hushed
room:
“Well, how’s the theory of cycles going?”
They had been discussing this theory not long ago, and Ruska had meant to
look for confirmation of it in Mommsen.
Ruska turned around at Nerzhin’s whisper but looked blank. He wrinkled his
brow, struggling to make sense of the question.
“I mean, how’s the theory of historical cycles going?”
Ruska sighed, and as he released his breath, his face and his restless mind
also relaxed. He leaned sideways, shifted his weight onto his elbow, tossed his
cigarette, which had gone out half smoked, into the empty pack Nerzhin had put
next to him, and said dully: “I’m sick of everything. Books and theories
included.”
They were silent again. Nerzhin was about to turn onto his other side when
Ruska gave a laugh and began whispering, gathering speed as he warmed to his
subject:
“History is so monotonous that it makes you sick to read it. It’s as bad as
Pravda. The nobler and more honorable a man is, the dirtier the treatment his
fellow countrymen hand out to him. Spurius Cassius wanted to get land for the
common people, and the common people let him be put to death. Spurius
Melius wanted to give bread to the hungry people, was suspected of wanting to
be king, and was executed. Marcus Manlius, the one who was awakened by the
cackling of the geese in all the schoolbooks and saved the Capitol, was
executed for treason! What do you think of that?”
“You amaze me!”
“Read enough history, and you’ll want to be a villain yourself. It pays better.
If it hadn’t been for the great Hannibal, we would never have heard of
Carthage, but the wretched place banished him, confiscated his property, and
razed his dwelling to the ground! There’s nothing new under the sun. All that
time ago, Gnaeus Naevius was put in the stocks for writing daring plays. The
Aetolians, long before we thought of it, proclaimed a false amnesty to entice
émigrés back home and put them to death. The Romans had already arrived at a
truth that the Gulag keeps forgetting: It’s uneconomic to let a slave go hungry;
you must feed him. The whole of history is one unmitigated fuck-up. It’s every
man for himself and the devil take the hindmost. There’s neither truth nor error,
no progress, no future.”
The ghastly blue light made the disillusionment trembling on those young lips
more painful to see.
It was partly Nerzhin’s doing that Ruska had begun to think this way, but
hearing it from Ruska now made him want to protest. Among his older friends
Gleb’s role was destructive criticism, but he felt some responsibility toward
this young prisoner.
“A word to the wise, Rostislav,” he replied very quietly, leaning over so that
he was almost speaking into his neighbor’s ear. “However clever and
ungainsayable such philosophical systems as skepticism or agnosticism or
pessimism may be, you must remember that they are in their very nature
condemned to impotence. They cannot govern human activity, because people
cannot stand still and so cannot do without systems that affirm something, that
point to some destination.”
“Even if the goal is a quagmire? Anywhere, just as long as we press on?”
Ruska retorted.
“Even if . . .” Gleb hesitated. “Hell, I don’t know. Look, I myself think that
mankind has a great need of skepticism. We need it to crack open rock-hard
heads, to choke fanatical throats. It is needed here more than anywhere, yet it
establishes itself on Russian soil with more than usual difficulty. But
skepticism cannot give a man a firm footing. And that is something he must
have.”
“Give me another cigarette.”
Ruska lit up and puffed nervously.
“You know, it’s a good thing the MGB didn’t let me go on studying. And end
up as a historian.”
He pronounced each word distinctly, in a loud whisper.
“Suppose I’d graduated, and gone on to do postgraduate work, like an idiot.
Say I had become a scholar, and maybe not a venal hack, though that’s a big
maybe. Say I’d written a fat book taking a fresh look (the eight hundred and
third) at ancient Novgorod’s administrative system, or Caesar’s war with the
Helvetians. . . . There are so many cultures in the world! So many languages!
So many countries! So many clever people, and still more clever books, in
every one of them! What sort of idiot would want to read it all? What was that
quotation of yours? ‘The conclusions arrived at by experts with such difficulty
will be shown by other, still greater, experts to be illusory.’ Was that it?”
“Steady now,” Nerzhin admonished him. “You’re cutting the ground from
under your feet. You’re leaving yourself nothing to aim at. We can doubt, we
must doubt. But we must have something to love, don’t you think?”
Ruska seized on the word. “To love! Yes, something to love,” he crowed.
“But not history, not theory—a girl.” He leaned over toward Nerzhin’s bed and
seized his elbow. “What is the most important thing they’ve deprived us of,
would you say? The right to attend meetings? Politics classes? The right to
subscribe to State Loans? The one and only thing that the Big Chief could do to
hurt us was to deprive us of women! So that’s what he has done. For twentyfive
years! The swine! I wonder if anybody realizes,” he said, beating his
breast, “what a woman means to a prisoner?”
“You can go mad that way!” Nerzhin protested, but a sudden warmth welled
up in him when he thought of Sima and her promise for Monday evening. . . .
“Get it out of your head! Or your mind will black out altogether.” (Ah, but on
Monday . . . the thing that comfortable married people take for granted, but that
becomes a raging, feverish animal need in a desperate prisoner!) “What does
Freud call it?” His voice was getting weaker as his own thoughts grew
muddled. “Sublimation—that’s it! Switch your energy to other matters! Study
philosophy, and you’ll need neither bread nor water nor a woman’s caresses.”
(But he shivered as he pictured in detail what it would be like the day after
tomorrow. This unbearably delicious thought robbed him of speech.)
“My mind is fogged already! I won’t get to sleep all night! A girl! Everybody
needs a girl! To hold her in your arms. To . . . oh, what’s the use?” Ruska
carelessly dropped his cigarette onto the bedding, turned over abruptly,
flopped on his belly, and tugged the blanket over his head, exposing his feet.
Nerzhin grabbed the smoldering cigarette just as it was about to slip between
the bunks onto Potapov down below and stubbed it out.
He had recommended philosophy to Ruska as a refuge, but it was one in
which he heard himself howling like a caged animal. Ruska’s youth had been
spent on the run with the whole Soviet police force behind him, and now
prison had him in its clutches. But what about me? Gleb asked himself. What
held me back when I was seventeen, or nineteen, and hot gales of passion
darkened my mind? He had curbed himself, suppressed his urges, wallowed in
the dialectic like a piglet burying its snout in muck, grunting and guzzling,
afraid of missing something. The years before his marriage, his irrecoverable
misspent youth, were now, in prison after prison, his bitterest memory. He had
been helplessly ignorant, had no idea how to relieve his fits of madness,
lacked the words with which to draw someone close, the tone of voice that
women yield to. He was also inhibited by an old-fashioned concern for female
virtue, and there was no older and wiser woman to lay a gentle hand on his
shoulder. Or rather, one such woman had called to him, and he had not
understood. Later, on the floor of a prison cell, he had gone over it all in his
mind, remembered that lost chance and all those wasted years, and these
memories were like red-hot needles in his brain.
Never mind—less than forty-eight hours to get through until Monday evening.
Gleb leaned over and whispered in his neighbor’s ear. “Ruska! What about
you? Is there somebody?”
“Yes, there is.” He spoke in a painful whisper, lying flat on his back and
clutching his pillow. He was breathing into it, and the heat returned by the
pillow, and all the heat of his youth that was wasting away so uselessly in
prison fevered the trapped young body that cried out for and had no hope of
relief. He had said, “Yes, there is,” and he wanted to believe that there was a
girl; but what he had was something elusive, indefinable . . . not a kiss, not
even a promise, only the memory of how one evening a girl had listened to his
stories about himself with a look of compassion and fascination, and her look
had made Ruska for the first time feel that he was a hero and his life story a
remarkable one. Nothing had happened between them as yet, but enough had
happened for him to say that he did indeed have a girl.
Gleb continued questioning him. “So who is she?”
Rostislav peeked from under the blanket and answered in the darkness.
“It’s . . . it’s Klara.”
“Klara? The prosecutor’s daughter?”