Chapter-52-To-the-Resurrection-of-the-Dead!

NADYAAND SHCHAGOV had felt drawn to each other because neither of them
was from Moscow. The Muscovites whom Nadya met in graduate school and
in laboratories carried within themselves the poison of their imagined
superiority, or what they themselves called their “Moscow patriotism.”
However pleased her professor was with her work, in their eyes Nadya was
an inferior being.
She could not remain indifferent to Shchagov, who was also a provincial but
who cut his way through that milieu as an icebreaker cleaves clear water. She
was in the reading room one day when a youngish senior research student,
hoping to make Shchagov look small, asked him, with an arrogant toss of his
snake’s head: “Let me see . . . what locality do you come from exactly?”
Shchagov, who was taller than the questioner, stared at him with bored
compassion, rocking slightly on his feet.
“You’ve never been there,” he said. “It’s a locality called the front line. I’m
from a hamlet called Dugout.”
No man’s life proceeds at an even tenor through the years. There will always
be a time when he realizes himself most fully, feels most deeply, makes the
greatest impression on others—and on himself. All that happens afterward,
however significant on the face of it, is most likely to be an abatement, the
ebbing of that high tide. We never forget that time; we endlessly ring the
changes on it. For some people it may even be their childhood, and they remain
children all their lives. For others it is the time of first love, and it is they who
have spread the myth that we love only once. There are those for whom the
great time was when they were richest, most esteemed, most powerful; and
they will still be mumbling without a tooth in their gums about their departed
greatness. For Nerzhin the decisive period was prison. For Shchagov, life at
the front.
Shchagov had experienced all the horrors of war. He was called up in its
first month and returned to civilian life only in 1946. Through all four years of
the war, there was hardly a morning when Shchagov could be sure he would
live till evening. He never held an important staff job and was out of the front
line only when in the hospital. He had retreated from Kiev in 1941 and on the
Don in 1942. Even when the war was taking a turn for the better, Shchagov had
to run for it in 1943 and again at Kovel in 1944. In roadside ditches, in flooded
trenches, in burned-out buildings, he learned to appreciate a mess tin of soup,
an hour of peace, the meaning of true friendship, and the meaning of life
generally.
It would be decades before the marks left on Engineer Captain Shchagov
healed completely. For the present he was incapable of dividing people into
more than two categories: soldiers and the rest. Even on the streets of
Moscow, where memory is short, he had kept his belief that the word “soldier”
is the only guarantee of candor and goodwill. Experience had taught him not to
trust anyone who had not undergone the ordeal by fire in battle.
When the war ended, Shchagov had no family left, and the little house they
had lived in had been razed to the ground by a bomb. His possessions were
what he had on and a suitcase packed with booty from Germany. True, to soften
the impact of civilian life, newly demobilized officers received twelve
months’ pay “according to rank,” which was a wage for doing nothing.
Like many soldiers returning from the front, Shchagov did not recognize the
country he had spent four years defending. Young memories still preserved the
mirage of equality, but at home its last pink wisps had disappeared. The
country had become callous, utterly unscrupulous, and a great gulf had opened
up between abject poverty and brazenly rapacious wealth. Soldiers returning
from the front were, for a time at least, better men than they had been. They
came back cleansed by the proximity of death, and they were hit all the harder
by the changes at home, changes that had matured far from the battle zones.
These veterans were all back now, walking the streets, riding in the metro,
but dressed any old way, so that they no longer recognized one another. And
they had to accept the prevalence of the code they found here over their own,
the code of the front line.
A man might clutch his head and wonder what he had been fighting for. Many
in fact asked that question but quickly found themselves behind bars.
Shchagov did not ask. He was not one of those recalcitrants who never tire in
the quest for universal justice. He knew that there was no changing the course
of things; you could only choose whether to jump on board or not. It was clear
that nowadays the daughter of a local officeholder was destined by birth never
to dirty her hands, never to work in a factory. It was impossible to imagine the
secretary of a district Party Committee, dismissed from his job, settling for one
at a factory bench. The people who set norms in industry were not those who
had to fulfill them; just as those who gave the order to attack were not those
who had to carry it out.
None of this was new to our planet, only to a Revolutionary country. The
galling thing was that years of service without ever removing his boots might
seem to entitle Captain Shchagov to a share in the good life he personally had
helped to win, but nobody recognized this right. He had to establish his right to
it all over again; in bloodless battle this time, without gunfire, without
grenades, he had to fight his way through the serried ranks of bureaucracy to
get his claim stamped with the seal of official approval.
And through it all he had to keep smiling.
Shchagov had been in such a hurry to get to the front in 1941 that he had not
troubled to complete his final year and graduate. Now, after the war, he had to
catch up and struggle to obtain a higher degree. His subject was theoretical
mechanics; he had thought of devoting himself entirely to it before the war.
Things were easier then. He had returned to find that enthusiasm for learning—
learning anything and everything—had become an epidemic since salary scales
had been adjusted sharply upward.
So he had steeled himself for another long campaign. He had sold off the
German booty bit by bit. He made no effort to keep up with the changing
fashions in men’s clothes and shoes but defiantly went on wearing the things he
was discharged in—army boots, army breeches, a coarse tunic with four rows
of medal ribbons and two wound stripes. But because of this, he had not lost
the allure of the wartime soldier, and it gave him in Nadya’s eyes an affinity
with just such another, Captain Nerzhin.
Nadya, who was easily hurt by any little misfortune or affront, looked up to
Shchagov, with his armor-plated worldly wisdom, like a little girl and
regularly asked his advice. But even with him she stubbornly stuck to the lie
that her Gleb had been reported missing in action.
Nadya had landed herself in all this—the “spare” cinema ticket, the playful
tussle over the notebook—without realizing what was happening. This time she
knew as soon as he entered the room and while he was bandying words with
Dasha that he had only come to see her and that something was bound to
happen.
And although she had just been weeping over the wreckage of her life, when
she tore up the ten-ruble note she was suddenly renewed, eager to live life to
the full, then and there.
In her heart she felt no contradiction.
Shchagov, once he had mastered the emotion that his brush with her had
aroused, reverted to his usual deliberate manner.
He told the girl straight out that she should not count on marrying him.
When she heard that he was engaged, Nadya took a few halting steps about
the room, then went to stand beside him at the window, silently tracing patterns
on the glass with her finger.
He felt sorry for her. He would have liked to break the silence and say quite
simply, with the frankness to which he had grown unused, “Poor little student,
with no connections and no future, what do you have to offer me?” He had a
perfect right to his piece of the cake (he would have taken it some other way if
ours were not a country in which talented people are torn to pieces before they
get anywhere). He felt an urge to confide in Nadya, tell her that though his
fiancée lived a life of idleness, she was not hopelessly spoiled. She had a nice
apartment in an expensive and exclusive building, where only top people were
quartered. There was a doorman in the hall and carpet on the stairs—where
did you ever see that in the Soviet Union nowadays? The main thing was that
all his problems would be solved at once. What better way could there be?
He thought all this but said nothing.
Resting her temple against the glass and looking out into the night, Nadya
spoke slowly. “That’s fine. You have a fiancée. And I have a husband.”
“A husband missing in action?”
“No, not missing,” she whispered.
(How rash she was, giving away her secret!)
“You mean you hope he’s alive?”
“I saw him. . . . Today. . . .”
(She had given herself away, but never mind; she didn’t want him to think
that she was a slut, throwing herself at him.)
It didn’t take Shchagov long to work it out. He did not assume, as a woman
might, that Nadya had been deserted. He knew that “missing, whereabouts
unknown” nearly always referred to “displaced person,” and that if such a
person were “displaced” back to the Soviet Union, it would only be to
disappear behind bars.
He moved closer to Nadya and took her elbow.
“You saw Gleb?”
“Yes,” she said almost soundlessly, expressionlessly.
“Where is he? Inside?”
“Yes.”
“So tha-a-at’s it!” Shchagov said, as though relieved of a burden. He thought
a moment. Then quickly left the room.
Nadya’s senses were so numbed by shame and despair that she had not
detected the new note in Shchagov’s voice.
He had run away. So what? She was glad that she had told him. Now she was
alone again with her honestly borne burden.
The filament in the bulb was still glowing feebly.
Dragging her feet as though they were too heavy for her, Nadya crossed the
room, found the second cigarette in the pocket of her fur coat, reached for a
box of matches, and lit up. She found some satisfaction in the nauseating
harshness of the tobacco.
She wasn’t used to it, and it made her cough.
In passing, she spotted Shchagov’s overcoat lying on a chair in a shapeless
heap.
Imagine his rushing out like that! She had given him such a fright that he had
forgotten his coat.
It was very quiet, and she could hear the radio in the next room . . . could
hear . . . yes, it was . . . Liszt’s Étude in F Minor.
She used to play it herself at one time, when she was a girl; but had she
really understood it? Her fingers had played the notes, but the word
“disperato”— “despairing”—could have found no echo in her heart.
Leaning her brow against the window sash, Nadya pressed the palms of her
hands against the cold panes.
She stood as though crucified on the black cross of the window frame.
There had been one little warm spot in her life, and now there was none.
But it took her only a few minutes to reconcile herself to the loss. She was
her husband’s wife again.
She stared into the darkness, trying to make out the chimney stack of the
Matrosskaya Tishina prison.
Disperato! That helpless despair, when you struggle to rise from your knees
and sink back again. That importunate high D flat, like a woman’s hysterical
shriek! Like a cry of inconsolable suffering!
The row of streetlamps outside carried her eyes into the pitch darkness of a
future she would rather not live to see.
The étude ended, and 6:00 p.m., Moscow time, was announced.
Nadya had forgotten all about Shchagov, when he suddenly came in again
without knocking.
He was carrying a bottle and two little glasses.
“All right, then, soldier’s wife!” he said roughly, cheerfully. “Don’t let it get
you down. Take hold of this glass. Keep your head and all may be well. Let’s
drink to the resurrection of the dead!”