Chapter-38-Be-Unfaithful-to-Me!

A BATTERED TRUCK BOUNCED over the bared roots of pine trees and snarled
its way through the sand drifts, carrying Nadya home from the battle zone. Gleb
watched the forest track grow longer, darker, narrower behind the truck and
swallow it. Who could have told them that the end of the war would be not the
end but the beginning of their separation?
Waiting for a husband to come home from the war is always hard, and
hardest of all in its last few months: Shrapnel and stray bullets do not ask how
much fighting a man has seen.
That was when Gleb stopped writing.
Nadya would run out to look for the mailman. She wrote to her husband,
wrote to her friends, wrote to his commanding officers. There seemed to be a
conspiracy of silence.
But she received no notification of burial.
In the spring of ’45, triumphant salvos every evening hailed the capture of
city after city: Königsberg, Breslau, Frankfurt, Berlin, Prague.
But no letter came. The world grew dark. She had no wish to do anything.
But she could not let herself go. If he was alive and if he came back, he would
reproach her for wasting her time. So she spent her days working for a higher
degree in chemistry, studying foreign languages and dialectical materialism,
and wept only at night.
Suddenly the Ministry of Defense stopped paying her allowance as an
officer’s wife.
That could only mean that he had been killed.
The four-year war ended immediately afterward! People crazed with joy ran
through the delirious streets. Pistols were fired into the air. Every loudspeaker
in the Soviet Union blared out victory marches over the battle-scarred and
famished country.
Nadya was notified not that he was dead but that he was missing. Ever eager
to arrest people, the state had always shied away from admitting it.
The human heart does not easily reconcile itself to the irremediable, and
Nadya found herself indulging in comforting fantasies. Perhaps he had been
sent to reconnoiter deep in enemy terrain? Could he be carrying out some
“special mission”? A generation brought up to be suspicious and secretive
could imagine mysteries where there were none.
There was a heat wave in southern Russia that summer, but the sun did not
shine on the young widow. Still, she went on studying chemistry, languages,
and dialectical materialism (diamat), for fear of disappointing him when he
returned.
Four months after the war ended, it was surely time for her to accept that
Gleb was no longer living. But that was when the crumpled triangle of paper
arrived from Krasnaya Presnya: “My only love! It’s going to be another ten
years!”
Her family and friends could not understand her; she learns that her husband
is in jail, and all at once she’s bright and cheerful! How lucky that it wasn’t
twenty-five years, or even fifteen! It is only from the grave that people never
return; from prison they do! There was even something romantic about their
plight; a commonplace student marriage had become something noble,
something sublime.
Nadya no longer needed to fear that he was dead or that his feelings had
treacherously changed, and she felt a new uprush of strength. He was in
Moscow, so she must go to Moscow to save him! (Her presence at his side
would be enough to save him, or so she thought.)
But how could she get there? Posterity will never be able to imagine how
difficult travel, and especially traveling to Moscow, was in those days. As in
the thirties, a citizen had to produce documentary proof that official duties
compelled him to become a burden on public transportation rather than sitting
quietly at home. If he succeeded, he was given a docket entitling him to hang
about in lines at railway stations, sleeping right there on a spittle-splashed
floor, or else to slip someone a timid bribe at the back door of the booking
office.
Nadya’s excuse was that she intended to study for a higher degree in
Moscow. She bought a ticket at three times face value and hurried to Moscow
with a briefcase full of textbooks on her lap, together with a pair of felt boots
for a husband whom the taiga awaited.
It was one of those supreme moments in life when good powers help us and
we succeed in all we undertake. The country’s finest graduate school accepted
an unknown provincial girl with no money, or connections, or even a telephone
number to her name. It was a miracle, but getting to see her husband in
Krasnaya Presnya transit prison proved harder! No visits were allowed while
the channels of the Gulag were choked by the incredible spate of prisoners
from Europe.
But as she was standing by the timbered guardhouse, waiting for an answer
to yet another futile application, Nadya saw a column of prisoners marched
through the unpainted wooden gates of the prison to work on the docks of the
Moscow River. One of those flashes of insight that prove so often accurate told
Nadya that Gleb was among them.
Two hundred men were marched out. They were all at that transitional stage
when a man is gradually shedding his “free” clothing and assuming the
slovenly dark gray costume of the zek. Every one of them still had about him
some memento of his past: a soldier’s peaked cap with a colored band but
without strap or star, or else calfskin boots not yet traded for bread or
appropriated by the professional criminals, a silk shirt split down the back. . . .
They were all close-cropped (some of them tried to shield their heads from the
summer sun), all unshaved, all thin, some to the point of emaciation.
Nadya had no eyes for the rest of them. She sensed where Gleb was and
spotted him immediately; he was walking along in his worsted tunic. Its collar
was unbuttoned, the red piping was still there on his cuffs, and an unfaded strip
on his chest showed where his medal ribbons had once been. He kept his hands
behind his back, as they all did. He did not look, as they went downhill, at the
sunlit spaces that you would expect to attract a prisoner, nor sideways at the
women with parcels (no letters reached prisoners in transit, and he could not
know that Nadya was in Moscow). He was just as yellow, just as emaciated as
his comrades, but he was beaming as he listened with delighted approval to the
dignified gray-bearded old man beside him.
Nadya ran alongside and called his name, but he could not hear her above the
buzz of conversation and the frantic barking of the guard dogs. She ran on,
gasping for breath, greedily drinking in the sight of him. How sorry she felt for
him, rotting away month after month in dark, stinking cells! What happiness it
was to see him, so near to her! How proud she was that his spirit was not
broken! And how vexed that he was evidently not grieving, that he had
forgotten his wife! And suddenly her pain was all for herself, as though he had
robbed her of happiness, as though she, not he, were the victim!
But it was all over in a moment. A guard yelled at her, the dogs, red-eyed
man-eaters, trained to terrify, strained at their leashes, barking and glaring.
Nadya was driven away. The column filed down a narrow slope, and there
was no room to squeeze in alongside. The last of the guards hung back to seal
off the forbidden area, and Nadya, following behind, had no hope of overtaking
the column, which disappeared from sight behind another blank fence.
In the evening and at night, when the inhabitants of Krasnaya Presnya, a
district of Moscow famous for its fight for freedom, could not see them,
special trains made up of cattle trucks pulled in at the transit prison; parties of
convoy guards with unsteady lamps, raucously barking dogs, peremptory
shouts, curses, and blows loaded prisoners forty to a truck and shipped them
by the thousand to Pechora, Inta, Vorkuta, Sov-Gavan, Norilsk, to the camps of
Irkutsk, Chita, Krasnoyarsk, Novosibirsk, Central Asia, Karaganda,
Dzhezkazgan, Pribalkhash, the Irtysh, Tobolsk, the Urals, Saratov, Vyatka,
Vologda, Perm, Solvychegodsk, Rybinsk, Potma, Sukhobezvodninsk, and many
nameless smaller camps. Groups of a hundred or two were carried off by day
in the backs of trucks to Serebryanny Bor, to Novy Yerusalim, to Pavshino, to
Khovrino, to Beskudnikovo, to Khimki, to Dmitrov, to Solnechnogorsk, or by
night to various places in Moscow itself, so that, hidden from view by blank
billboards and safe behind barbed-wire entanglements, they could build a
capital befitting an invincible great power.
Fate sent Nadya an unexpected but well-deserved reward: As luck would
have it, Gleb was not packed off to the Arctic Circle but dumped in Moscow
itself, in an elegant prison camp engaged in building accommodations for the
senior staff of the Ministries of State Security and the Interior, a crescentshaped
building at the Kaluga Gate.
When Nadya hurried there to visit him for the first time, she felt as though he
were halfway to freedom already.
Elegant cars, some with diplomatic license plates, drove up and down Great
Kaluzhskaya Street. Buses and trolleys stopped where the railings around
Neskuchny Park ended, and there was the guardhouse, looking like the shack at
the entrance to any ordinary building site. The people swarming high up on the
face of the new building wore torn and dirty clothes, but builders always look
like that, and passersby never guessed that these were prisoners. Or if they did,
they kept quiet about it.
Those were the days of cheap money and expensive bread. Things were sold
at home, and Nadya handed in parcels for her husband. The parcels were
always accepted, but permission to see him was rarely granted. Gleb was not
fulfilling his quota of work. When she did see him, she hardly recognized him.
Adversity always changes arrogant people for the better. Gleb was gentler; he
kissed his wife’s hands; he watched the changing light in her eyes. He felt as
though he were no longer in prison. Camp life, which surpasses in savagery all
that we know about the lives of cannibals or rats, had almost broken him. But
he had by conscious effort risen above self-pity, and now he struggled to make
her see reason.
“My dearest! You don’t know what you are letting yourself in for. You will
wait for a year, maybe three years, five years even; but the nearer the end, the
harder waiting will become. The last few years will be the hardest. We have
no children, so don’t ruin your young life; give me up; marry somebody else!”
He did not altogether mean what he was saying, but he had to make the offer.
And she protested without really meaning what she was saying: “Are you
looking for an excuse to get rid of me?”
The prisoners lived in an unfinished wing of the house they were building.
The women who brought them parcels could look over the fence as they got off
the trolleys and see the faces of men crowding around two or three windows.
Sometimes they could see “love-girls” among them. One “love-girl” standing
at the window embraced her camp “husband” and shouted over the fence at his
lawful wife: “Why don’t you stop chasing him, you slut! Hand the parcel over,
make it the last, and get lost! If I see you at the guardhouse again, I’ll scratch
your ugly mug to bits!”
The first postwar elections to the Supreme Soviet were approaching.
Moscow prepared for them zealously, as if it were really possible for a voter
to abstain or a candidate to fail. The authorities wanted to keep the “politicals”
in Moscow (they were good workers) but had qualms; vigilance could be
blunted. To give the rest a scare, some of them must be sent away. Alarming
rumors of imminent transfer to the Far North went round the Moscow camps.
Prisoners who had potatoes baked them to eat on the journey.
So that nothing could dampen the enthusiasm of the electorate, visits to
prisoners in Moscow camps were prohibited pending the elections. Nadya
took along a towel for Gleb with a note stitched onto it:
“My beloved! However many years go by, whatever storms may gather over
our heads” (Nadya affected a high-flown style), “your little girl will be true to
you as long as she lives. They say that your category is to be sent out of
Moscow. You will be in distant places, cut off from any chance of a visit or
even an exchange of stolen glances across the wires. If in that life of
unrelieved gloom any distraction can lighten the burden on your heart, I shall
resign myself. I authorize you, indeed I insist on it—be unfaithful to me; take up
with other women. Do whatever you must to keep your spirits up! I am not
afraid. I know that, whatever happens, you will come back to me, won’t you?”