Chapter-30-A-Puzzled-Robot

NERZHIN ALMOSTBOWLED Junior Lieutenant Nadelashin over in the dimly lit
staff hallway as he rushed back to his quarters. The scrap of terry toweling
was still tucked loosely around his neck and into his jacket.
Just five minutes earlier, when he was standing in the hallway waiting to be
called in, the thirty years of his life had seemed to him one long, senseless,
depressing chain of misfortunes from which he lacked the strength to struggle
free. And the greatest of these misfortunes had been his departure for the army
so soon after his marriage, then his arrest and his long separation from his
wife. Their love, he saw clearly, was doomed to be trampled in the mud.
But now he had been told that he would be seeing her around noon today, and
suddenly his life was like a taut bowstring—a life that made perfect sense, in
the round and in detail; a life in which his war service, his arrest, and all those
years apart from his wife were simply the most unlooked-for episodes in his
progress toward his goal. Outwardly he might seem unhappy, but Gleb was
secretly happy in his unhappiness. He drank from it as from a fresh spring. In
this place he had gained an understanding of people and of events not to be had
elsewhere, least of all in the sheltered comfort of a quiet family home. From
his early years what Gleb had most feared was getting bogged down in a life of
humdrum routine. As the proverb says, “It’s not the sea that drowns you, it’s the
puddle.”
But he would go back to his wife! They were soul mates! The ties that bound
them were unbreakable! A visit! She was coming to see him! On his birthday!
And after yesterday’s talk with Anton! It was the last visit he would ever be
allowed in this place, but it could never have meant more to him. Thoughts
flashed through his mind like fiery arrows: Don’t forget to say this! Remember
to say that! Oh, yes, and that!
He rushed into the semicircular room, where prisoners were scurrying
around, making a lot of noise. Some had just come back from breakfast, others
were only just on their way to wash, and Valentulya had thrown back his
blanket and was sitting up in his underclothes, laughing and gesticulating as he
told them about his conversation with the bossy night owl who had turned out
to be the minister. Valentulya was worth listening to! But this was, for Gleb,
one of those amazing moments in life when the singing inside you threatens to
burst your rib cage, and a century is not long enough to do everything you want
to do! Still, he couldn’t miss breakfast either; breakfast is a blessing that a
prisoner is not always destined to enjoy. Anyway Valentulya’s story was
nearing its inglorious end; the whole room condemned him as a cheap little
pipsqueak for his failure to tell Abakumov about the things prisoners so
desperately needed. Now he was struggling and squealing while five volunteer
torturers dragged his underpants off and, egged on by the whoops, howls, and
guffaws of the rest, chased him round the room, warming his hide with their
belts and splashing him with spoonfuls of hot tea.
Along the radial passageway to the central window, Andrei Andreevich
Potapov was sitting on the bunk under Nerzhin’s and facing the one Valentulya
had vacated, drinking his tea, watching the fun, laughing until he cried, and
dabbing at the tears under his glasses. No sooner was reveille sounded than
Potapov’s bedding was arranged in an uncompromisingly exact right-angled
parallelepiped. The bread he was eating with his tea was very thinly buttered;
he never bought extras in the prison shop but sent all the money he earned to
his “old woman.” (He was paid a lot by the sharashka’s standards—150 rubles
a month, a third as much as a free cleaning woman, because he was an
irreplaceable expert and in good standing with the bosses.)
Nerzhin removed his jacket as he went, tossed it onto his still-unmade bed,
said good morning to Potapov, without waiting for his answer, and rushed off
to breakfast.
Potapov was that very engineer who had confessed under interrogation,
attested in a signed deposition, and confirmed in court that he had sold to the
Germans, and sold at a bargain price, the firstborn offspring of the Stalin FiveYear
Plans, the Dnieper Hydroelectric Station, though only after it had been
blown up. For this unimaginable, this incomparably heinous crime, Potapov’s
punishment, thanks to the clemency of a humane tribunal, was a mere ten years
of imprisonment followed by deprivation of rights for five years—“ten and
five on the horns,” in prison slang. Nobody who knew Potapov when he was
young, and certainly not he himself, could have dreamed that, nearing forty, he
would be jailed for a political offense. Potapov’s friends called him, with
some justice, a robot. Life for Potapov meant only work; even three-day public
holidays bored him, and he had gone on leave only once in his life, when he
got married. In other years there was nobody around to stand in for him, and he
had willingly given up his vacation. If there was a shortage of bread,
vegetables, or sugar, he took little notice of such irrelevancies; he just
tightened his belt and cheerfully continued work on the only thing that
interested him, high-voltage transmission. Except when they told jokes,
Potapov was only dimly aware of people who were not concerned with highvoltage
transmission. Those who created nothing with their hands but merely
sounded off at meetings or wrote for newspapers he did not regard as people at
all. He had been in charge of all electrometric procedures at the Dnieper
Hydroelectric Station and had sacrificed his wife’s life as well as his own on
the insatiable bonfire of the Five-Year Plans.
By 1941 they were building another power station, and Potapov was exempt
from military service. But when he heard that the Dnieper Station had been
blown up, he said to his wife, “I will have to go, Katya.”
And her reply was, “Yes, Andrei, you must.”
And off he went, wearing pebble glasses, an ill-fitting tunic, and, although he
had one tab on his shoulder, an empty holster. (There was still a shortage of
weapons for officers in the second year of the war for which we were so well
prepared.) At Kastornaya, in the July heat and the smoke from burning rye, he
was taken prisoner. He escaped but was recaptured before he could reach his
own lines. He escaped again, but parachutists dropped around him on the open
plain, and he was a prisoner for the third time.
He went through the cannibal camps of Novograd-Volyn and Czestochowa,
where prisoners ate bark from the trees, grass, and dead comrades. The
Germans suddenly transferred him from one such camp to Berlin, where
someone who spoke excellent Russian (“a polite man but scum”) asked
whether he could possibly be Potapov, the Dnieproges engineer. By way of
proof, could he draw a diagram, say, of the switch mechanism for the
generator?
The diagram in question had already been published, and Potapov had no
hesitation in drawing it. He told the story himself under interrogation, though
he need not have done so.
This was what was described in his case history as “betraying the secret of
the Dnieper Hydroelectric Station.”
What followed, however, was not included in his dossier: The unknown
Russian who had thus verified Potapov’s identity invited him to sign a
voluntary declaration of his willingness to restore Dnieproges, whereupon he
would be released immediately and given ration cards, money, and any job he
liked.
When this tempting offer was laid before him, the painful workings of the
robot’s mind showed in his heavily wrinkled face. Then, without striking his
chest or shouting proud words, staking no claim to the posthumous title of Hero
of the Soviet Union, Potapov humbly answered in his southern brogue:
“You must know that I’ve signed one oath of loyalty. If I sign this other now,
it’ll be a bit of a contradiction, won’t it?”
In this mild and untheatrical fashion did Potapov express a preference for
death rather than the good life.
“Well, I respect your convictions,” the unknown Russian answered, and sent
him back to the cannibalistic camp.
The Soviet court did not include this in the charges against him and so gave
him only ten years.
Engineer Markushev, on the other hand, did sign such an undertaking and did
go to work for the Germans, and the court sentenced him to ten years also.
There you see Stalin’s hand! That purblind equation of friend and foe which
made him unique in human history!
Nor did the court try Potapov for his behavior in 1945 when, mounted on a
tank, wearing the same old cracked and wired-up spectacles, machine gun in
hand, he burst into Berlin with the Soviet assault force.
So Potapov got off lightly, with a mere “ten and five.”
NERZHIN GOTBACK FROM BREAKFAST, kicked off his shoes, and climbed on to
his bunk, rocking both himself and Potapov. He now had to perform his daily
acrobatic exercise: make his bed, leaving not a single wrinkle, while standing
on it. But as soon as he tossed his pillow aside, he discovered a cigarette case
made of dark red translucent plastic that contained a dozen “White Sea Canal”
cigarettes tightly packed in a single layer and had a plain paper band around it,
on which was written in a draftsman’s neat hand:
Ten years he spent thus, killing time:
His life suspended in his prime.
There could be no mistake about it. In the whole sharashka no one but
Potapov was capable at once of such craftsmanship and of quoting lines from
Yevgeny Onegin remembered from his schooldays.
Gleb lowered his head over the side of his bunk and called to him. Potapov
had finished his tea and unfolded his newspaper. He was reading it sitting up,
so as not to make his bed untidy.
“What now?” he muttered.
“This is your work, isn’t it?”
“I couldn’t say. Did you find it somewhere?” He was trying not to smile.
“Andreich!” said Nerzhin reproachfully.
A smile of good-natured artfulness made Potapov’s wrinkles deeper.
Straightening his glasses, he answered.
“I was sharing a cell in the Lubyanka with Count Esterhazy once, carrying the
night bucket out on even dates, you know how it goes, while he did it on odd
ones, and teaching him Russian from the “Prison Rules” on the wall, and I gave
him three buttons made out of bread as a birthday present—all his buttons had
been cut off—and he swore that not one of the Hapsburgs had ever given him a
more welcome present.”
In the “Classification of Voices” Potapov’s was described as “toneless and
crackly.”
Still hanging head down, Nerzhin gazed affectionately at Potapov’s rugged
face. With his glasses he looked no older than his forty years and still quite
vigorous. But when he took them off, the dark hollows under his eyes were
those of a death’s-head.
“But you embarrass me, Andreich. I can’t give you anything like this. I
haven’t got hands like yours. . . . How did you manage to remember my
birthday?”
“Are there any other notable dates in our lives here?”
They sighed.
“Want some tea?” Potapov asked. “It’s my special brew.”
“No, Andreich, I haven’t got time for tea. I’m getting a visit today.”
“Great! Your old woman?”
“Uh-huh.”
“Hey, you, Valentulya, stop generating smoke right by my ear.”
“What right does one person have to bully other people?”
“What’s in the paper, Andreich?” Nerzhin asked.
Potapov looked up at Nerzhin’s suspended face with a crafty Ukrainian
squint.
Tall tales from the Britannic muse
The budding maiden’s dreams confuse.
“They have the bare-faced impudence to maintain that. . . .”
Nerzhin and Potapov had met in the second year after the war, nearly four
years ago. In a restless, rackety, overcrowded Butyrki cell, half dark even in
mid-July. There, and at that time, the most wildly different careers, the
unlikeliest paths crossed. The latest influx was from Europe. Through the cell
passed novices still cherishing faint memories of European freedom; sturdy
Russian prisoners of war, exchanging a German stalag for their fatherland’s
Gulag; hammer-hardened and hot-forged veterans of the camps, in transit from
the cave dwellings of the Gulag to the oases of the sharashkas. When he got
into the cell, Nerzhin slid flat on his belly under the bedboards (they were
close to the ground), and down there on the asphalt floor, before he could make
anything out in the dark, cheerfully asked: “Who’s last in the line, friends?”
A cracked, unmusical voice replied: “Cuckoo! You’re after me.”
After that they moved along, under the bedboards, from day to day, as men
were pulled out for posting, “away from the pail and toward the window”; and
in the third week they began the return journey back “from the window toward
the pail,” but by now on top of the bedboards. Later on they shuffled toward
the window across the wooden boards once more. That was how Nerzhin and
Potapov became firm friends, in spite of differences in age, background, and
tastes.
There it was that Potapov, in the weary months of brooding after his trial,
confessed to Nerzhin that he never had taken any interest in politics, and never
would have, if politics hadn’t laid about him and kicked his ribs in.
There, under the bedboards in the Butyrki Prison, the robot for the first time
in his life began to wonder—which, as everybody knows, is bad for robots.
No, he still did not regret refusing German rations; he did not regret the three
lost years awaiting death from starvation in captivity. And as before he thought
there should be no question of submitting our internal disorders to the judgment
of foreigners.
But the spark of doubt had fallen into his mind and smoldered.
For the very first time the perplexed robot had asked himself, “What the hell
was the Dnieper Power Station built for, anyway?”