Chapter-57-Prisoners’-Petty-Matters

NERZHIN WENTTO HELP Potapov make the cream. His hungry years in German
prison camps and Soviet prisons had convinced Potapov that the process of
mastication was not something to be ashamed of or treated lightly but one of
the most delectable things in life and one in which its true meaning is revealed.
I count the hours to dinner, I count the hours to tea,
But perhaps the hour of supper is dearer still to me
was a favorite quotation of this outstanding Russian power-station engineer,
who had devoted his whole life to transformers with a capacity of thousands
and thousands and thousands of kilowatts.
Potapov was one of those engineers whose hands are as nimble as their
brains, so he quickly became an uncommonly good cook. In the
Kriegsgefangenenlager he used to bake an orange cake using nothing but
potato peelings, and in the sharashkas he had specialized in desserts and
become an expert.
At that moment he was at work over two lockers placed together in the dimly
lit passage between his own bed and Pryanchikov’s; a pleasant twilight was
created by the mattresses on the upper bunks, which obstructed the light from
the bulbs in the ceiling. Since the room was a semicircle and the beds stood
along its radii, the passage was narrow at its entrance and broadened out
toward the window. Potapov was also making full use of the enormous
windowsill (its width was four and a half thicknesses of brick); tin cans,
plastic containers, and basins stood there in close array. Potapov was
performing his rite, trying to whip condensed milk, cocoa concentrate, and two
eggs (Rubin had slipped some of these gifts to him; he regularly received
parcels from home and always shared their contents) into something with no
name in human speech. He chided Nerzhin for meandering around and ordered
him to improvise some extra glasses (one was the cap of a Thermos bottle, two
were small chemical beakers from the labs, and Potapov had molded two from
greaseproof paper). Nerzhin suggested converting two shaving mugs into
additional glasses and undertook to rinse them conscientiously with hot water.
A restful Sunday atmosphere descended on the semicircular room. Men
perched on the beds of recumbent friends for a chat. Men read and exchanged
casual remarks with neighbors. Yet others lay doing nothing, with their hands
behind their heads and their eyes fixed unblinkingly on the white ceiling.
Conversations merged in a general hubbub.
Zemelya, the vacuum man, was taking his ease. He lay on his upper bunk,
wearing only his underpants (it was rather hot up there), stroking his shaggy
chest, smiling his invariable benevolent smile, and telling Mishka the Mordvin,
two yards away by air, the following story:
“If you really want to know, it all began with that half kopeck.”
“What half kopeck?”
“In those days—1926, 1928, you were only a boy—there was a sign over
every cash desk saying, ‘Ask for your half kopeck change.’ There was such a
coin, a half kopeck. The girl at the desk handed it over without a word.
Anyway, we had the NEP then; it was just like peacetime.”
“You mean there wasn’t a war?”
“I’m not talking about war, you dope! When I say peacetime, I mean before
Soviet power. Oh yes. . . . Under the NEP, people in government offices
worked six hours, not like now. And they managed all right. And if they kept
you behind as much as fifteen minutes, they paid you overtime. Now what do
you think was the first thing to vanish? The half kopecks. And that’s when it all
started. After that the copper coins vanished. Then in ’30 the silver, and there
wasn’t any small change at all. You could ask till you were blue in the face;
you wouldn’t get any change. Since then things have never been right. There
was no small change, so they started counting in rubles. Take a beggar—he
doesn’t ask nicely for ‘a kopeck for the love of Christ’ anymore; it’s more of a
demand: ‘Citizens, give me a ruble!’ When you pick up your pay at the office,
the kopecks are shown on the stub, and that’s it. If you ask for them, they only
laugh—what a cheapskate! But they’re the idiots! When you give a man his half
kopecks, you’re showing respect for him; if they don’t change your ruble at
sixty kopecks, they’re shitting on you. People didn’t hold out for their half
kopecks, so they lost half their lives.”
On the other side, another prisoner, also on a top bunk, looked up from his
book and said to his neighbor, “Absolutely useless, the tsarist government!
Listen to this, Sasha my friend: A woman Revolutionary went on hunger strike
for eight days to make the prison governor apologize to her, and the clown did
just that. Try making the big chief at Krasnaya Presnya apologize!”
“Our lot would have been feeding the stupid woman through a pipe on the
third day and slapping a fresh sentence on her for provocation. Where did you
get that from?”
“Gorky.”
Dvoetyosov, who was lying not far away, shot up.
“Who’s reading Gorky?” he asked in a menacing bass.
“I am!”
“What the hell for?”
“What else is there to read?”
“You’d be better off in the shithouse, communing with your soul. World’s full
of damned readers, damned humanists—dirty bums, the lot of you.”
Below them a debate was in progress on that age-old prison theme: When’s
the best time to get thrown in? The wording of the question fatalistically
assumed that imprisonment was unavoidable. (There is a general tendency
among prisoners to exaggerate their own numbers. When there were only
twelve to fifteen million of them, they were convinced that there were twenty
or thirty million. Zeks felt sure that their rulers and the MVD were almost the
only male persons at liberty.) When’s the best time to go inside? means Is it
better when you’re young? Or in your declining years? Some (usually younger
men) cheerfully argued that it was better early in life: It gave you time to learn
what life was all about, what was precious and what was shit, so that at the
age of thirty-five or so, a man with a “tenner” under his belt could build his
life on sound principles. Whereas, they argued, a man who went inside later in
life would be tearing his hair because he had not lived as he should, because
the life he had led was one long chain of mistakes and it was now too late to
put them right. Others (usually older men) on such occasions no less cheerfully
argued that, on the contrary, if a man goes inside later in life, it is very much
like retiring on a pension or withdrawing to a monastery, after taking from life
all that it has to offer (this “all” in the reminiscences of zeks narrows down to
enjoyment of the female body, smart clothes, rich food and drink), and there
isn’t much they can do to an old man in a camp. Whereas they can knock the
stuffing out of a young man and leave him such a wreck that he’ll never want to
“have a go at a woman” again.
This was how they argued in the semicircular room that day, and how
prisoners always argue, some to console themselves, some rubbing salt in their
own wounds, but their arguments and anecdotes were husks that held no kernel
of truth. On Sunday evening it turned out that the right time to go inside is . . .
anytime, but when they got up on Monday morning, it was obvious that there is
never a good time.
Yet that isn’t quite true either.
The “best time to go inside” argument was one of those that do not
exasperate the debaters but pacify them, soothe their souls with philosophic
melancholy. These debates never ended in explosions.
Thomas Hobbes says somewhere that if the truth that “the sum of the angles
of a triangle is equal to 180 degrees” threatened anyone’s interests, blood
would be shed for it.
But Hobbes did not know the convict mentality.
The argument in progress on the end bunk by the door was in fact one of
those that can lead to blows or bloodshed, although it affected nobody’s
interests. A turner had come to spend the evening with his friend, an
electrician. They began by talking for some reason about Sestroretsk and then
went on to talk about the stoves in houses at Sestroretsk. The turner had spent a
winter there and remembered clearly what the stoves were like. The
electrician had never been there himself, but his brother-in-law was a stove
installer, a first-class workman, and had built stoves right there in Sestroretsk,
and what he used to say about them was just the opposite of what the turner
remembered. They began by simply contradicting each other, but the quarrel
reached the stage of quivering voices and personal insults, and the noise began
to drown out all other conversations in the room. Each man felt humiliated by
his inability to prove beyond doubt that he was right. They looked in vain for
an arbitrator among those around them until they suddenly remembered that
Spiridon, the yardman, knew about stoves, enough at any rate to tell one of
them that the crazy sort of stove he was talking about didn’t exist in Sestroretsk
or for that matter anywhere on earth. To the great relief of everybody in the
room, they hurried off to find him.
But in the heat of the moment, they forgot to close the door, and another, no
less excruciating, argument overflowed from the hallway: Should the beginning
of the second half of the twentieth century correctly be celebrated on January 1,
1950, or January 1, 1951? The debate had evidently started some time ago and
was bogged down in arguments about the year in which Christ was born on
December 25. Somebody slammed the door. The head-splitting noise ceased,
and in the sudden silence Khorobrov could be heard talking to the bald-headed
designer above him.
“When we begin the first flight to the moon, a meeting will of course be held
around the rocket before blastoff. The crew will make a solemn commitment to
economize fuel, to exceed the cosmic speed record in flight, not to stop the
spaceship for repairs en route, and to pass their landing test on the moon with
top marks. One of the three crew members will be the political officer. On the
way, he will conduct uninterrupted mass-indoctrination work with the pilot and
the navigator, explaining the importance of space travel and soliciting
comments for the wall newspaper.”
This was overheard by Pryanchikov as he darted across the room with towel
and soap. A balletic leap brought him to Khorobrov’s bed, and he assumed an
awesome frown.
“Ilya Terentich!” he said. “I can put your mind at rest. It will not be like
that.”
“How will it be then?”
Pryanchikov put his finger to his lips like someone in a detective film.
“The first to reach the moon . . . will be the Americans.”
He burst into ringing, childish laughter and ran off.
The engraver was sitting on Sologdin’s bed. They were engrossed in a
conversation about women. He was forty and, although his face was young,
quite gray. This made him very good-looking.
He was on top of the world today. True, he had made a mistake that morning;
he had scrunched his latest story up into a ball and swallowed it, although, as it
turned out, he could have got through the body search with it and passed it to
his wife. But to make up for this, she had told him that she had shown his
previous stories to a few trusted friends, and they were all thrilled with them.
Praise from friends and relations might of course be exaggerated and not
altogether deserved, but damn it, where could he get a fair assessment?
Whether it was done well or badly, the engraver was preserving the truth for
all time, the cries of tortured souls, what Stalin had done to millions of Russian
POWs. And now he was proud, happy, fulfilled, and determined to go on with
his writing. Today’s visit had been satisfactory in other ways, too; he had a
devoted wife waiting for him, working to obtain his release, and her efforts
would soon prove successful. He was seeking an outlet for his elation in the
long story he was telling to this unremarkable, though not exactly stupid, man
Sologdin, whose past and future were drab and colorless in comparison to his
own.
Sologdin was lying stretched out on his back with an open book facedown on
his chest, bestowing on the speaker an occasional flashing glance. With his
little blond beard, his bright eyes, his high forehead, and his regular features,
Sologdin was like an Old Russian knight—and unnaturally, indecently
handsome.
He, too, was on top of the world. He heard within himself a sort of
triumphant chant celebrating a cosmic victory—his own victory over the whole
world, his omnipotence. His release could not be more than a year away. After
which a dizzy career perhaps awaited him. Moreover, his body was not aching
for a woman, as it usually did; it was appeased and purged of its turbid
longings.
So seeking an outlet for his elation and for amusement, he let his attention
glide lazily along the meanderings of a story that meant nothing to him, a story
told by this not-at-all stupid but perfectly ordinary man, to whom nothing so
wonderful could possibly happen.
He often listened to people, as if patronizing them, trying not to let it show
only out of politeness.
The engraver began by telling him about his two wives in Russia, then went
on to reminisce about Germany and the charms of the German women with
whom he had been intimate. He drew a comparison between Russian and
German women that was new to Sologdin. He said that having lived with both,
he preferred the Germans. Russian women were too sure of themselves, too
independent, too demanding in love. They loved with eyes wide open, studying
the loved one’s failings, discovering that he was not as noble, not as
courageous, as they could wish. If you loved a Russian woman, you always
had the uncomfortable feeling that she was your equal, whereas a German
woman was as pliant as a rush in her lover’s hands, for he was her god, the
greatest and best man on earth; she surrendered herself unreservedly to his
tender mercy. She dreamed only of how best to please him, and because of this,
the engraver had felt more of a man, felt that he was “lord and master” with
German women.
Rubin had rashly gone out into the hallway for a smoke, but not one of his
fellow prisoners walked past without an irritating remark. Sick of the pointless
argument out there, he crossed the room, hurrying back to his books, but
someone on a lower bunk clutched his trouser leg and asked, “Is it true, Lev
Grigorievich, that in China stoolies’ letters don’t need stamps? If so, would
you call that progressive?” Rubin freed himself abruptly and went on his way.
But an electrical engineer, hanging down from a top bunk, caught him by the
collar of his overalls and began ramming home his last words on a subject they
had argued about before.
“Lev Grigorievich! We have to adjust the conscience of mankind in such a
way that people take pride only in the work of their own hands and feel
ashamed to be overseers, managers, or party leaders. We must make it so that a
minister conceals his rank just like a sewer man conceals his occupation. The
minister’s job is no less necessary but is shameful. If a girl marries a state
official, let it be a disgrace to her whole family! That’s the sort of socialism I
would be content to live under!”
Rubin freed his collar, broke through to his bed, lay on his belly, and went
back to his dictionaries.