Chapter-68-Spiridon’s-Criterion

THE TREADS OF the wooden staircase creaked and groaned as feet tramped and
shuffled overhead. Now and then, fine dust and scraps of rubbish rained down
on them, but Spiridon and Nerzhin hardly noticed.
They sat, clasping their knees, on the unswept floor, in greasy, worn-out blue
overalls, their seats stiff with dirt. It was rather uncomfortable sitting like that,
leaning back on the sloping boards lining the underside of the stairs. They
looked straight ahead, their eyes fixed on the peeling side wall of the
bathroom.
Nerzhin chain-smoked, as he always did when he was trying to work
something out, placing his crushed cigarette ends in a row by the rotting
baseboard underlining the triangle of dirty whitewashed wall beneath the
stairs. Spiridon, like everybody else, received his allowance of White Sea
Canal cigarettes—with a picture on the pack to remind him of the murderous
work he had done in that murderous part of the world which had almost been
his grave—but he was a strict nonsmoker, obeying the orders of the German
doctors who had given him back three-tenths’ vision in one eye, given him back
light.
Spiridon had kept his grateful respect for German doctors. When he was
blind beyond hope of recovery, they had driven a long needle into his spine,
put ointment in his eyes, kept them bandaged for a long time, then removed the
bandages in a half-darkened room and said, “Look!” And the world was lit up
again! The dim nightlight seemed to Spiridon like bright sunshine. Spiridon
could make out with his one eye the silhouette of his savior’s head, and he bent
to kiss his hand.
Nerzhin imagined the Rhenish doctor’s tense, preoccupied face softening at
that moment. Looking at the redheaded savage from the eastern steppes,
liberated from his bandages, hearing that warm voice choked with gratitude,
perhaps he would be thinking that the savage was meant for better things and
was not to blame for being what he was.
From the German point of view, his behavior had been worse than that of a
savage.
Immediately after the war, Spiridon and his family were living in an
American camp for displaced persons. He met a man from his own village, a
relative by marriage and a “dirty dog,” said Spiridon, because of something he
had done when they were cobbling together the kolkhoz. Spiridon and he had
traveled as far as Slutsk together but had been separated in Germany. So of
course they had to celebrate their reunion, and all they had was a bottle of raw
alcohol brought along by the in-law. The spirits weren’t proofed, and they
couldn’t read the German label; but it was costing them nothing. Evidently,
even the wary Spiridon, whose circumspection had saved him from a thousand
dangers, still had his share of his fellow countrymen’s reckless fatalism. So . . .
pull the cork, brother! Spiridon knocked back a tumblerful, and his pal downed
the rest in one swig. Luckily, Spiridon’s sons weren’t there, or they would
have been given a shot apiece. When he woke up shortly after midday,
Spiridon was alarmed to find the room in darkness so early. He put his head
out the window, but there was no more light outside, and he couldn’t for the
life of him understand why the American staff building across the street and the
sentry outside it had no upper halves. He hoped to conceal this disaster from
Marfa, but by evening he was completely blind.
His drinking companion died.
After the first operation the eye doctors told him to take it easy for a year,
then they’d operate again, and he’d recover the sight in his left eye in full and
his right eye in part. This was a firm promise. All he had to do was wait.
“But our lot—the dirty bums—filled our ears with lying tales, told us there
were no collective farms anymore, that all was forgiven, our brothers and
sisters were expecting us, all the bells were ringing. . . . Enough to make you
slip out of your American shoes and run home barefoot.”
This was too much for Nerzhin. “Danilych!” he said urgently, as if it were
not too late for Spiridon to reconsider. “You knew things were never like they
said! It was you who talked about planting corn and goosegrass coming up!
What on earth possessed you? Surely you didn’t believe them?”
Spiridon laughed, fine wrinkles around his eyes.
“Who, me? I knew for sure they’d slip the hard collar on me, Gleb, my boy. I
was in the lap of luxury with the Americans; I’d never have come back
willingly.”
“We know the bait they generally used. Men came back because their
families were here. But yours was right there under your wing. Who enticed
you back to the Soviet Union?”
Spiridon sighed. “I said to Marfa Ustinovna right away, ‘They’ll promise us
a lake, old girl, but who knows whether they’ll let us lap from a stinking
puddle?’ She just ruffled my hair a bit and said, ‘Let’s just wait till you’ve got
your eyes back; then we’ll see. Let’s wait for the other operation.’ But the three
kids were so excited, they just couldn’t wait; they kept on at us: ‘Daddy!
Mama! let’s go home! Back where we belong! Anybody would think there
aren’t any eye doctors in Russia. We smashed the Germans, didn’t we?
Somebody must have looked after the wounded. Our doctors are better than
theirs!’ They said they had to finish school in Russia; my older boy only had
two more classes to take when we left. My little girl, Vera, never stopped
sniveling and blubbering. ‘D’you want me to marry a German?’she kept
saying. As if there weren’t plenty of Russians for her on the Rhine; but no, the
silly girl thought she’d miss her number-one suitor if she didn’t come back
here. . . . They had me scratching my head. ‘Children, children,’ I told them,
‘there are doctors in Russia, all right, but life there is murder; your father’s
already had one narrow escape; why are you so desperate to get there?’ But no,
it’s only the burned child that fears the fire.”
So Spiridon had joined the ranks of those destroyed by their children.
His mustache, ginger bristles touched with gray, quivered as he remembered.
“I didn’t believe their leaflets for one second: I knew I would go straight to
jail. Still, I thought they’d heap all the blame on me and leave the children out
of it. It wasn’t their fault. I’d be locked up, but the kids could lead their own
lives. Only, those scoundrels had their own ideas; they laid hands on the family
as well.”
Men and women had been separated at the frontier and sent on in different
trains. Spiridon’s family had held together all through the war, but now it fell
apart. Nobody asked whether you were from Bryansk or Saratov. His wife and
daughter were deported, without trial, to the Perm oblast, where his daughter
now worked on a power saw in a lumber camp. Spiridon and his sons were
whisked behind the wires; the boys, as well as their father, were tried for
treason and given ten years each. Spiridon landed in the camp at Solikamsk
with his younger son and was at least able to mother him a bit for the next two
years. The other son was thrown into one of the remote Kolyma camps.
This, then, was home. So much for his daughter’s dream suitor and his sons’
education.
What with the ordeal of interrogation and malnutrition in camp (he gave half
his daily ration to his son), Spiridon’s eyesight did not improve; indeed, he
began to lose the sight of his good, left eye. Out there in the depths of the
forest, with all around him snarling and snapping like wolves, asking the
doctors to restore his sight would have been almost like asking to be taken
alive up to heaven. What passed for a hospital in camp could not have told him
whether there was treatment for his eyes to be had in Moscow, still less, set
about treating them itself.
With his head in his hands, Nerzhin puzzled over his enigmatic friend. He
could neither look up to this peasant, this victim of events, nor look down on
him. He could only sit shoulder to shoulder with him, and eye to eye. Their
conversations seemed to be compelling Nerzhin, more and more insistently, to
ask one question. The whole pattern of Spiridon’s life demanded an answer to
that question. The time to ask it seemed to have come.
Was the complexity of Spiridon’s life, his repeated abandonment of one
warring side for the other, simply a matter of self-preservation? Or was it
somehow an illustration of Tolstoy’s belief that in this world no one is ever
right and no one is ever to blame? That the Gordian knots of history cannot be
cut with a presumptuous sword? Perhaps the more or less instinctive actions of
this redheaded peasant exemplified the universal philosophical system known
as skepticism?
The social experiment that Nerzhin had mounted seemed to be yielding, that
very day, there under the staircase, surprising and brilliant results.
“I’m worried to death, Gleb,” Spiridon was saying, rubbing his unshaved
cheek hard with a gnarled and work-worn hand as though he were trying to
skin it. “It’s four months since I had a letter from home.”
“I thought you said the Snake had a letter for you?”
Spiridon looked at him reproachfully. (His eyes might be dim, but they were
fixed in a meaningless stare like those of a man born blind.)
“What good is a letter four months late?”
“If you get it tomorrow, bring it along, and I’ll read it to you.”
“There’s no hurry now.”
“Maybe a letter got lost in the mail? Maybe the godfathers have kept you
waiting deliberately? Don’t worry yourself for nothing, Danilych!”
“What do you mean, for nothing? My heart’s aching for Vera. The poor girl’s
only twenty-one, and she’s there without her father and brother, and her
mother’s nowhere near.”
Nerzhin had seen a photograph of this Vera, taken the previous spring. A big,
buxom girl with large, trusting eyes. Her father had brought her safely through a
world war. When she was fifteen, thugs had tried to rape her in the forests
around Minsk, and he had saved her with a hand grenade. But what could he do
now, from prison?
Nerzhin imagined the dense Perm forest, the power saw chattering away like
a machine gun, the hideous roar of tractors hauling logs, the trucks with their
rear wheels bogged down and their radiators raised to heaven as if in prayer,
the grimy, foul-tempered tractor drivers who had forgotten the difference
between obscene words and others—and among them a girl in overall jacket
and trousers provocatively emphasizing her womanly shape. She would be
sleeping around the campfire with them. Nobody would pass by without
pawing her. No wonder Spiridon’s heart ached for her.
Words of comfort would be worse than useless. Try to take his mind off it,
and seek in him a counterbalance to your intellectual friends! Perhaps, Gleb
thought, this is when I will learn the fundamentals of homespun peasant
skepticism, so that I can base myself on it in the future.
He laid his hand on Spiridon’s shoulder, still leaning back against the sloping
underside of the stairs, and began hesitantly framing his question: “There’s
something I’ve been wanting to ask you for a long time, Spiridon Danilych.
Don’t misunderstand me. . . . I’ve heard so much about your ups and downs.
. . . You’ve had a hell of a life . . . like many others, I suppose . . . very many
. . . you’ve been shoved around from pillar to post always looking for
something that may not exist . . . but there must have been some point in it.
What I mean is . . . I would like to hear what you think . . . when we try to
understand life, what”—he nearly said “criterion”—“what yardstick should
we use? For example, are there really people on this earth who deliberately set
out to do evil things? Who say to themselves, I want to hurt people, to inflict
all the pain I can, to make their lives impossible? I don’t really think so, do
you? That saying of yours about sowing rye and goosegrass coming up. . . . At
least it was rye they sowed, or so they thought. It may be that all human beings
want to do good or think they’re acting for the best, but nobody is infallible,
we all make mistakes, and some people are quite brazen about it, which is why
they do each other so much harm. They can convince themselves that they’re
doing good, but the results are bad.”
Perhaps he hadn’t expressed himself very clearly. Spiridon was looking
askance, frowning as though he suspected a trap.
“Suppose you make a glaring mistake, and I want to correct you. I speak to
you about it, but you ignore me, gag me, try to shove me in jail. What am I to
do? Hit you over the head with a stick? It’s all very well if I am right, but
suppose I just imagine I am, suppose it’s just a stubborn idea I’ve gotten into
my head. What if I push you off your perch and take your place, and then if
things don’t go the way I want, it’s my turn to pile up corpses? What I mean is,
if you can’t be sure that you’re always right, should you or shouldn’t you
intervene at all? When we’re at war, we always think we’re in the right, and
the other side thinks they are. Can anybody on this earth possibly make out
who’s right and who’s wrong? Who can tell us that?”
Spiridon’s frown had disappeared, and he answered as readily as if he’d
been asked which guard would be on duty next morning. “I can tell you: Killing
wolves is right; eating people is wrong.”
“What? What’s that you say?”
The simplicity and certainty of Spiridon’s answer took Nerzhin’s breath
away.
“Just that,” Spiridon said. “The wolf killer is in the right; the man-eater is
not.”
Gleb’s face felt warm breath from under that mustache as Spiridon leaned
close to whisper: “Gleb, if somebody told me right now there’s a plane on the
way with an atom bomb on board—d’you want it to bury you like a dog here
under the stairs, wipe out your family and a million other people, only old
Daddy Whiskers and their whole setup will be pulled up by the roots so that
our people won’t have to suffer anymore in prison camps and collective farms
and logging teams”—Spiridon braced himself, pressing his tensed shoulders
against the stairs as though they threatened to collapse on him, with the roof
itself and all Moscow to follow—“believe me, Gleb, I’d say, ‘I can’t take it
anymore, I’ve run out of patience,’ and I’d say”—he looked up at the imaginary
bomber—“I’d say, ‘Come on, then! Get on with it! Drop the thing!’ ”
Spiridon’s face was contorted with fatigue and suffering. A single tear ran
over the reddened rim of each unseeing eye.