Chapter-81-The-Scientific-Elite

BOBYNIN WAS MARCHING along in the outer circle of strollers, keeping to
himself and oblivious to the commotion around the stoolies, when little
Gerasimovich tacked toward him like a fast launch intercepting a big ship.
“Aleksandr Yevdokimovich!”
Accosting and obstructing others in the exercise yard was considered bad
form among the prisoners, and anyway these two hardly knew each other. But
Bobynin came to a stop.
“I’m listening.”
“I have a very important question for you. It has to do with scientific
research.”
“Ask away.”
They walked on, side by side, not too slowly, not too quickly.
Gerasimovich, however, went halfway around while he framed his question.
“Don’t you feel ashamed of yourself sometimes?”
Bobynin, taken aback, swiveled his great cannonball of a head to look at his
companion. (But they kept walking.) His eyes returned to the view ahead: lime
trees, the big shed, people, the main building.
He thought it over for a good three-quarters of a circuit, then said, “Indeed I
do.”
Another quarter circle.
“So . . . why?”
A half circle.
“I want to go on living, damn it. . . .”
A quarter circle.
“. . . I don’t really know what to think.”
Another quarter circle.
“It varies from one minute to the next. . . . Yesterday I told the minister that
there’s nothing left for me. But it wasn’t true. I have my health, haven’t I? I
have hope. I’m quite possibly number-one candidate for. . . . I could be
released before I’m too old, meet the one and only woman . . . have children.
. . . Then again, it can be interesting, damn it. Right now it is interesting. . . . I
despise myself, of course, for feeling that way. . . . There are moments when.
. . . The minister tried leaning on me. . . . I wasn’t having any. . . . You get
drawn in, willy-nilly. . . . Ashamed? Yes, of course.”
They were silent for a while.
“So don’t blame the system. It’s our own fault.”
A full circle.
“Aleksandr Yevdokimovich, what if you were offered early release as a
reward for making an atom bomb?”
Bobynin glanced curiously at his companion. “Well, would you do it?”
“Never.”
“Sure?”
“Never.”
A full circle. But a slightly different one.
“You find yourself wondering sometimes what they’re like—the people who
make the atom bomb for them. Then you take a closer look at us, and you think
they’re probably no different. Maybe they even attend politics classes.”
“Oh, come on!”
“Why not? It would be good for morale.”
An eighth of a circle.
“As I see it,” the little fellow went on, “a scientist ought to know all about
politics, including the politicians’secret plans; in fact, he ought to feel sure that
someday he’ll take control of policy himself. Either that or he should treat it as
an impenetrable fog, a black hole, and make no political judgments, take a
purely ethical view instead and ask himself, ‘Can I entrust such undeserving,
indeed such utterly worthless, people with control over the forces of nature?’
Those who say ‘America is a threat to us’ have one foot in the quagmire
already; that’s a childish misconception, not a scientific judgment.”
“Yes, but what will they be thinking on the other side of the ocean?” the giant
asked doubtfully. “And what are we to make of the new American president?”
“I don’t know; maybe it’s the same over there. Maybe there’s nobody to. . . .
We scientists can’t get together in an international forum and reach an
understanding. But our intellectual superiority to all the politicians in the
world makes it possible for every one of us, even in jail, even in solitary, to
find a correct common solution and act accordingly.”
Full circle.
“Yes.”
Another circle.
“You may be right.”
Quarter circle.
“Let’s continue this colloquium in the lunch break tomorrow. Let’s see, your
name is Illarion. . . .”
“Pavlovich.”
Another incomplete circle—a horseshoe.
“Another thing . . . concerning Russia. Somebody told me today about a
painting called Vanishing Russia. Do you know about it?”
“No.”
“Well, it hasn’t been painted yet. And maybe I’ve got it wrong. Perhaps it’s
just a title, an idea. In Old Russia there were conservatives, reformers,
statesmen; now there are none. In Old Russia there were priests, preachers,
bogus holy men in rich households, heretics, schismatics; now there are none.
In Old Russia there were writers, philosophers, historians, sociologists,
economists; now there are none. And of course there were Revolutionaries,
conspirators, bomb throwers, rebels; they, too, are no more. There were
artisans wearing headbands, and there were tillers of the soil with beards
down to their waists, peasants in troikas, daredevil Cossack horsemen, hoboes
roaming free . . . none of them left, none at all! The shaggy black paw raked
them all in during the first dozen years. . . . But while the plague raged, living
water still filtered through . . . and its source was ourselves, the scientific
elite. Yes, engineers and scientists were arrested and shot, but fewer of us than
of other groups. Because any mountebank can churn out ideological drivel for
them, but physics obeys only the voice of its master. We studied nature,
whereas our brothers studied society. We’re still around; our brothers are no
more. So who inherits the unfulfilled destiny of the elite in the humanities?
Perhaps we do? If we don’t take a hand, who will? And who says we can’t
manage it? Though we’ve never laid hands on them, we’ve weighed Sirius B
and measured the kinetic energy of electrons; surely we can’t go wrong with
society? But what are we doing instead? Making them a gift of jet engines!
Rockets! Scrambler telephones! Maybe even the atomic bomb! Anything, just
so long as we live comfortably. And—interestingly! What sort of elite are we
if we can be bought so cheaply?”
Bobynin sighed like a blacksmith’s bellows.
“It’s a very serious problem,” he said. “Let’s carry on tomorrow, all right?”
The bell was ringing for work.
Gerasimovich caught sight of Nerzhin and arranged to meet him after nine
that evening in the artist’s studio on the back stairs.
He had already promised to tell him about the rationally constructed society.