Chapter-12-Number-Seven

JUSTAS ORDINARYSOLDIERS KNOW, without being shown the battle orders
from headquarters, whether they are part of the main offensive or a supporting
action, so the three hundred zeks in the Marfino sharashka had correctly
deduced that Number Seven was the decisive sector.
No one was supposed to know Number Seven’s real name, but everybody in
the institute did. It was the “Clipped Speech Laboratory.” “Clipped” was an
English word. Not only the engineers and translators in the institute but the
fitters, the turners, the grinders, perhaps even the deaf and slow-witted
carpenter, knew that the original models for the installation were American,
though officially they were “ours.” This was why American journals with
diagrams and theoretical articles about clipping, which were on sale on
newsstands in New York, were here given serial numbers, stapled, classified,
and, to frustrate American spies, sealed up in fireproof safes.
Clipping, damping, amplitude compression, electronic differentiation, and
integration of random speech—it produced an engineer’s parody of human
speech. It was as if someone had taken it into his head to dismantle New Athos
or Gurzuf, put the material in little cubes in matchboxes, mix them all up, fly
the lot to Nerchinsk, sort them out, and reassemble them precisely as they were
before, reproducing the subtropics, the sound of the surf, the southern air, and
moonlight.
This was just what had to be done with the speech reduced to little packages
of electrical impulses, and what is more, it had to be reproduced not only so
that it could be understood but so that the Boss could recognize the voice at the
other end.
While prisoners in the camps gritted their teeth in the struggle for existence,
those in the sharashkas lived in something like luxury. And the authorities had
long ago made it a rule that if a project was successful, the zeks most closely
concerned with it received all that they could desire—their freedom, a clean
passport, an apartment in Moscow—while the others received nothing, not a
single day’s remission of sentence, not even a hundred grams of vodka in honor
of the victors.
There was nothing in between.
So those prisoners who had successfully acquired that special tenacity that
seems to enable a prisoner to cling to a mirror with his fingernails tried to get
into Number Seven as a springboard to freedom.
One who succeeded was the brutal engineer Markushev, whose knobbly face
radiated readiness to die for the ideas of Engineer Colonel Yakonov. Others of
the same stripe also found their way there.
But the perspicacious Yakonov also recruited zeks who had not volunteered.
One such was Amantai Bulatov, a guileless Kazan Tatar with big horn-rimmed
glasses and a deafening laugh who was serving ten years as an ex-POW and
for his alleged link with Musa Dzhalil, an “enemy of the people.” (They
jokingly called Amantai the firm’s oldest employee. After graduating from the
Radio Institute in June 1941, he was tossed into the Smolensk debacle.
Because he was a Tatar, the Germans extracted him from the POW camp, and
he began his practical work on the shop floor of the Lorenz company when its
management was still signing letters with a “Heil Hitler!” Then there was
Andrei Andreevich Potapov, an expert on ultrahigh voltages and the
construction of power stations. He had landed in Marfino because an
incompetent bureaucrat had made a mistake when consulting the Gulag’s card
index. But Potapov, a real engineer and an indefatigable workhorse, soon
found his way around at Marfino and was irreplaceable in the handling of
apparatus for the precise measurement of radio frequencies.
There was also engineer Khorobrov, an outstanding radio expert. He had
been assigned to Number Seven at its inception, when it was just one team
among others. He had wearied of it recently and made no effort to keep up with
its furious tempo. Mamurin was getting just as tired of him.
Finally a special order as swift and urgent as a lightning flash had produced
from a punitive brigade in a hard-labor camp near Salekharda a gloomy
prisoner and engineer of genius, Aleksandr Bobynin, who was immediately set
over all the others. Bobynin had been plucked from the jaws of death. And now
Bobynin was first in line for release if their project succeeded. So Bobynin
worked hard, keeping it up after midnight, but with such an air of dignified
disdain that Mamurin was afraid of him and did not dare make the sort of
remarks to him that no one else was spared.
Number Seven was the same sort of room as the Acoustics Lab, but on the
floor above it. It, too, was littered with apparatus and a medley of furniture,
but there was no ramshackle soundproof box in a corner.
Since Yakonov appeared in Number Seven several times a day, it did not
treat his arrival as a descent from on high. All that happened was that
Markushev and other toadies made sure that he saw them and bustled around
more briskly and cheerfully than ever, while Potapov, to make himself
invisible, used a frequency meter to stop a gap among the apparatus on a rack
that screened him from the rest of the laboratory. He had worked without a
break, paid all his debts, and was now quietly fashioning a lump of transparent
red plastic into a cigarette case, intended as a Christmas present for someone.
Mamurin rose to meet Yakonov as his equal. He was not wearing blue
overalls like the other zeks but a suit of expensive cloth, yet even this made his
haggard features and his bony frame no handsomer.
The expression on his sallow brow and his bloodless lips, the lips of one not
long for this world, was meant to signify pleasure, and Yakonov read it right.
“Anton Nikolaich! We’ve readjusted to every sixteenth impulse, and it’s
much better. Come and listen in. I’ll read you something.”
“Reading” and “listening in” were the usual way of testing the quality of a
telephone circuit: The circuit would be changed several times a day by the
addition or subtraction of a unit, and adjusting the articulation every time was
laborious, too slow to keep up with the ideas of the engineers on design, and it
was not worth trying to get rough figures from the forbidding science now
monopolized by Roitman’s foster child Nerzhin.
Mamurin and Yakonov, obedient as usual to a single thought, had no need of
questions or explanations. Mamurin went first to the far corner of the room,
turned his back, pressed the receiver to his cheekbone, and started reading
from a newspaper into the telephone, while Yakonov stood by the stand with
the control panels, put on the earphones plugged in to the other end of the
circuit, and started listening. Something dreadful was going on in the
earphones; the sounds made by Mamurin were fragmented by crackling,
rumbling, and howling. But just as a mother gazes lovingly at her ill-favored
babe, Yakonov, instead of tearing the earphones from his tortured ears, listened
harder and decided that this new horrible noise seemed rather better than the
horrible noise he had heard before dinner. The new noise was not live
colloquial speech but a measured and exaggeratedly precise recital: Mamurin
was reading an article about the high-handedness of Yugoslav frontier guards
and the effrontery of the butcher Rankovich, who had turned a freedom-loving
country into one great dungeon, so that Yakonov easily guessed the bits he
couldn’t hear, realized and as quickly forgot that he was guessing, and became
more and more certain that audibility had improved since dinner.
He naturally wanted to share his joy with Bobynin. The heavily built, thickset
prisoner with the defiantly shaved head (you could please yourself how you
wore your hair in the sharashka) was sitting nearby. He had not turned around
when Yakonov entered the lab, but instead crouched over a long strip of photooscillogram
film, measuring something with a pair of dividers.
This Bobynin was the least of God’s creatures, a nonexistent zek, the lowest
of the low, with fewer rights than a kolkhoznik.
* And Yakonov was a bigwig.
Yet Yakonov could not bring himself to distract Bobynin, however much he
wanted to.
You can build the Empire State Building. Train the Prussian army. Elevate
the hierarchy of a totalitarian state higher than the throne of the Most High.
But there are still people whose moral superiority defeats you.
There are common soldiers whose company commanders fear them.
Laborers whose foremen tremble before them. Prisoners who strike fear into
their interrogators.
Bobynin knew all this and deliberately took such a stand with his superiors.
Whenever Yakonov talked to him, he felt a cowardly urge to pander to this zek,
to avoid upsetting him. He was angry with himself, but he noticed that
everybody who talked to Bobynin behaved in the same way.
Yakonov interrupted Mamurin and took off his earphones.
“It’s better, Yakov Ivanovich, definitely better! I would like Rubin to listen in
a bit; he has a good ear.”
Somebody, once upon a time, had gotten from Rubin the answer he wanted
and had remarked upon his “good ear.” Others had repeated this unthinkingly
and come to believe it. Rubin had landed in the sharashka by chance and
earned his salt as a translator. His left ear was like everybody else’s, but he
was a little deaf in his right as a result of shell shock; he had to conceal this
after his hearing had been praised. The fame of his “good ear” had given him a
firm footing in the sharashka, and he had subsequently dug himself in still more
securely with his magisterial work on “The Audio-Synthetic and ElectroAcoustic
Aspects of Russian Speech.”
Rubin was summoned from the Acoustics Laboratory by telephone. While
they were waiting, they listened in again, some of them for the tenth time.
Markushev, eyes strained, brow knitted, held the receiver briefly and abruptly
pronounced it “better, much better.” (He had known it would be: Readjusting to
every sixteenth impulse had been his idea.) Bulatov could be heard all over the
lab shouting that they must arrange with the encoders to readjust to thirty-two
impulses. Two obliging electricians, Lyubimichev and Siromakha, shared a
pair of earphones, almost pulling them apart: Each of them listened with one
ear and enthusiastically confirmed that it had indeed become more distinct.
Bobynin went on measuring his oscillogram without raising his head.
The black hand of the big electric clock on the wall jumped to 10:30. In
every lab except Number Seven, they would shortly be finishing work and
handing in secret journals to be put in safes; the zeks would be going off to bed
and the free employees running to catch buses, which were infrequent at this
late hour.
Ilya Terentievich Khorobrov, keeping to the back of the lab where the bosses
could not see him, lumbered over to Potapov behind his shelf-rack. Khorobrov
was a native of Vyatka, from its most godforsaken corner, near Kai, bordering
on the land of the Gulag, thousands upon thousands of versts
**
of marsh and
forest, an expanse greater than France. He had seen and understood more than
most, and things had sometimes become so unbearable that he felt like standing
under one of the loudspeakers out in the street and banging his hand on the iron
post. The unremitting need to conceal his thoughts, to stifle his sense of
injustice, had bowed him, given him a forbidding look, etched deep lines
around his mouth. The time came when he could no longer suppress his longing
to speak his mind: At the first postwar elections he had crossed out the
candidate’s name and written a crude obscenity on the ballot form. That was a
time when houses could not be rebuilt and fields went unsowed for lack of
working hands. But a whole team of ace sleuths spent a month studying the
handwriting of every elector in the district, and Khorobrov was arrested. He
went off to the camp naively rejoicing that there at any rate he would be able to
speak his mind. But the camp was no free republic either! With stool pigeons
all around him, Khorobrov learned to hold his tongue there, too.
Common sense demanded that he should bustle about as busily as the others
in the anthill that was Number Seven and earn, if not his release, at least a
comfortable existence. But the loathing inspired in him by injustice, even when
it did not affect him directly, had reached such a pitch that he no longer wanted
to live.
He slipped behind Potapov’s shelf-rack, bent over his table, and quietly
suggested that they should leave.
“Andreich! It’s time we cleared off. It’s Saturday.”
Just at that moment Potapov was fixing a pale pink catch to the translucent
red cigarette case. Head on one side, he admired his work and asked:
“What do you think, Terentich? Do the colors match?”
Receiving no reply, neither approving nor negative, Potapov gave Khorobrov
a grandmotherly look over his wire-framed spectacles.
“Why tease the dragon?” he asked. “Time is on our side; any Pravda lead
article will tell you that. We’ll evaporate as soon as Anton leaves.”
He had a habit of separating his syllables and reinforcing the important word
in a sentence with a gesture.
By this time Rubin had arrived in the lab. Rubin had not been in the mood for
work all evening, and right then, at 11:00 p.m., the only thing he wanted was to
get back to the prison as quickly as possible and to lap up some more
Hemingway. But he arranged his features to express keen interest in the
improved quality of Number Seven’s circuit and would have no one but
Markushev as his reader, because his high-pitched voice with its basic tone of
160 hertz would come across less clearly. (This approach put his expertise
beyond doubt.) Rubin donned the earphones and repeatedly commanded
Markushev to read louder or more quietly or to repeat phrases that he himself
had invented to check particular sound sequences. In the end he gave it as his
verdict that by and large there was a tendency to improvement, that the vowels
came across just marvelously, that the unvoiced dentals were not quite so
good, that he was still worried about the fuzzy edges of zh, and that the
consonant group vsp, so characteristic of the Slavic languages, didn’t come
across at all and needed a bit more work.
There was an immediate chorus of delighted voices. So the circuit was an
improvement. But Bobynin looked up from his oscillogram, and his deep voice
boomed a mocking comment.
“Nonsense! It’s one step forward, one step back! What we need is method!”
His unwavering stare reduced them all to embarrassed silence.
Behind his shelf-rack Potapov was gluing the pink catch to the cigarette case.
Potapov had spent every day of his three years in Germany in prison camps.
He had survived mainly thanks to his skill in making attractive lighters,
cigarette cases, and holders from garbage and without tools.
Nobody was in any hurry to leave work! And this on the eve of their stolen
Sunday!
Khorobrov straightened up. He placed on Potapov’s table the things that had
to be put in the safe, emerged from behind the rack, and moved unhurriedly
toward the door, passing the crowd around the clipper.
Mamurin paled and barked angrily after him.
“Ilya Terentich! Why don’t you have a listen? Where do you think you’re
going, anyway?”
Khorobrov, just as unhurriedly, turned around and answered with a twisted
smile, stressing each syllable. “I would have preferred not to mention it out
loud. But since you insist, I am at present on my way to the lavatory, or shall I
say the john. If all goes well there, I shall proceed to the prison and go to bed.”
In the scared silence that followed, Bobynin, who was hardly ever heard to
laugh, guffawed.
This was mutiny on the high seas! Mamurin took a step toward Khorobrov, as
though about to strike him.
“What do you mean, sleep?” he shrilled. “Everybody else is working, and
you want to sleep?”
With his hand on the door handle, and scarcely containing himself,
Khorobrov answered, “That’s right. I just want to sleep! I’ve worked my
twelve hours according to the Constitution, and that’s enough!” He was about
to explode and add something irremediable, when the door opened and the duty
officer addressed Yakonov.
“Anton Nikolaich! You’re wanted urgently on the outside phone.”
Yakonov rose hurriedly and went out ahead of Khorobrov.
Shortly afterward, Potapov also turned off his desk lamp, transferred his own
and Khorobrov’s confidential papers to Bulatov’s desk, and limped neither
quickly nor slowly toward the door. A motorcycle accident before the war had
left him lame in his right leg.
The call for Yakonov was from Vice Minister Selivanovsky summoning him
to the ministry, to the Lubyanka, at twelve o’clock, midnight.
A dog’s life!
Yakonov went back to his office, dismissed Nerzhin, offered Verenyov a lift,
put on his street clothes, returned to his desk with his gloves on, and under
“Nerzhin—write off” added “Khorobrov ditto.”
* Kolkhoznik: A kolkhoz is a Soviet collective farm; a worker on it was known
as a kolkhoznik.
** Verst: Pre-Revolutionary unit of distance equal to 0.6629 miles.