Chapter-87-At-the-Fount-of-Science

THE DISPUTE WITH SOLOGDIN was still weighing on Rubin’s mind the next
morning. Arguments left half developed kept occurring to him. But the day that
followed was a lucky one, and he was able to put their inconclusive squabble
behind him.
He was in the quiet little top-secret den on the third floor. It had heavy
curtains at door and window, a shabby sofa, and a threadbare rug. The soft
furnishings muffled sound, but there was hardly any noise anyway; Rubin was
wearing earphones, listening to his tapes, and Smolosidov, looking haggard
and scowling at Rubin as if he were an enemy rather than a workmate, said not
a word all day. As far as Rubin was concerned, Smolosidov could have been
an automaton, there simply to substitute one reel for another.
Donning his earphones, Rubin listened over and over again to the fateful call
to the embassy and then to the taped conversations of the five suspects supplied
to him. Sometimes he believed his ears; sometimes he could not bring himself
to believe them and resorted to the serpentine audiovisual printouts made of all
the conversations. Ribbons of white paper many meters long festooned the
broad table and trailed on the floor. Every now and then, Rubin seized the
album, in which specimen sound pictures were classified sometimes by
phonemes, sometimes according to the basic tone of particular male voices.
With a copying pencil blunt at both ends (for Rubin, sharpening a pencil was a
task requiring lengthy preparation), he marked places on the tapes that
particularly interested him.
Rubin was carried away. His dark brown eyes were ablaze. He smoked—
pipe or cigarettes—incessantly, and there was ash everywhere: on his
unkempt, matted beard, the sleeves of his greasy overalls (a button was
missing from one cuff), the table, the tapes, the armchair, and the album
containing the audiovisual specimens. He had forgotten his liver and his
painful hypertonia, forgotten that he had eaten nothing since the cake at
yesterday’s birthday party. He was by now in that state of heightened
awareness when vision is sharp enough to single out a grain of sand and
memory readily supplies all that it has stored over the years.
He had not once asked what time it was. He had made just one attempt, on
arrival, to open a ventilation pane, in order to make up for the fresh air he had
missed, but Smolosidov said sullenly, “Don’t do that! I’ve got a cold.” After
that, he did not leave his seat all day, did not once go to the window to see the
snow turning gray and crumbly under the damp west wind. He did not hear
Shikin knocking and Smolosidov refusing to let him in. He saw Roitman come
and go, as if through a fog, and muttered something to him without looking
around. He was oblivious of the bell for the lunchtime break and the back-towork
bell. Eating is a sacred ritual for the zek, but Rubin’s instinctive hunger
was only aroused when someone—Roitman once more—shook him by the
shoulder and pointed to fried eggs, dumplings in sour cream, and stewed fruit
on a side table. Rubin’s nostrils twitched, his jaw dropped in surprise, but his
thoughts still seemed to be elsewhere. Surveying this food of the gods in
bewilderment, as though wondering what it was meant for, he moved to the
little table and began swallowing without tasting, in a hurry to get back to his
work.
Rubin did not appreciate his meal, but it had cost Roitman more than if he
had provided it as his own expense; he had “sat on the phone” for two hours
getting first the Special Technology Department, then General Bulbanyuk, then
the Prison Administration, then the Supply Department, and finally Lieutenant
Colonel Klimentiev to authorize the issue of so much food. Those at the other
end of the phone had in turn to square bookkeepers and other persons. The
difficulty was that Rubin was only entitled to the rations of a category 3
prisoner, and Roitman was trying to get him into “category 1” (the “dietetic
variant,” at that) for a few days while he worked on a job of special
importance to the state. After all the others had agreed, the prison itself raised
practical objections: ingredients requested unavailable in prison stores, cook
paid at appropriate rate for preparing individual menus likewise unavailable.
. . .
Roitman now sat facing Rubin across the table, not looking at him like a
taskmaster awaiting the fruits of a slave’s labor but smiling affectionately at
this overgrown child, enchanted with him, envying his inspiration, choosing the
right moment to discover where that half day’s work was leading and to join in
himself.
Rubin finished off the food, and his features relaxed as he returned to his
senses. For the first time since early morning, he smiled.
“You shouldn’t have fed me so well, Adam Veniaminovich. Satur venter non
studet libenter. A traveler always breaks the back of his journey before he
stops to eat.”
“Just look at the clock, Lev Grigorievich! It’s a quarter past three!”
“Eh? I thought it wasn’t twelve yet.”
“Lev Grigorievich! I’m consumed with curiosity; what have you come up
with?”
This was not an order from a superior. Roitman seemed to be pleading with
Rubin, afraid that he would refuse. When his better feelings were allowed to
show, Roitman was very likable, in spite of his ungainly appearance and thick
lips, which were always parted because of the polyps in his nose.
“It’s just a beginning! Just preliminary conclusions, Adam Veniaminovich.”
“And what are they?”
“Some of them may be disputable, but one is incontrovertible: The science of
phonoscopy, born today, has a rational core.”
“You aren’t letting yourself get carried away, are you, Lev Grigorievich?”
Roitman was as eager to believe as Rubin, but his own training told him that
in an “arts man” like Rubin enthusiasm might prevail over scientific rigor.
“When did you ever see me carried away?” Rubin asked rather huffily,
smoothing his untidy beard. “All the work we’ve been doing as a team for
nearly two years now, all these phonetic and stylistic analyses of Russian
speech, our study of sound pictures, classification of voices, examination of
national, group, and individual intonations, all that Anton Nikolaich regarded
as an idle pastime—and, let’s admit it, we ourselves felt doubt creeping in at
times!—all that is now yielding its cumulative results. Maybe we should get
Nerzhin over here; what do you think?”
“If the business expands, by all means. But for the present we have to show
that we deserve to survive by completing our first assignment.”
“First assignment! That first assignment is half of an entire science! It can’t
be done in a hurry.”
“But . . . Lev Grigorievich . . . you mean, . . . Surely, you realize how
urgently necessary it all is?”
He understood all right. Lyovka Rubin, member of the League of Communist
Youth, had grown up with those words ringing in his ears. They were written
large in the slogans of the thirties. There was no steel, no electricity, no bread,
no textiles. There were needs, and there was urgency—and blast furnaces were
erected, steel mills set rolling. Then, before the war, Rubin the scholar,
blissfully engrossed in the study of the leisurely eighteenth century, had become
soft. But the old rallying cry—“urgently needed!”—of course still awakened a
response and compelled him to follow through to the end any task he
undertook.
“Urgently needed!” Who could doubt it when there was a risk that this
greatest of traitors might slip through the net?
The light from outside was fading. They lit the overhead lamp, sat down at
the worktable, and examined the sample passages marked on the audiovisual
tapes with blue or red pencil: characteristic sounds, consonant combinations,
lines showing intonations. They did this together, just the two of them, ignoring
Smolosidov. He had not left the room for a single minute all day long. He sat
now over a magnetic tape, guarding it like a sullen black dog, looking at the
backs of their heads, and this unwavering hard stare pressed on their skulls and
brains. Smolosidov deprived them of something very small but supremely
important—unconstraint; he witnessed their vacillations, and he would witness
their confident report to higher authority.
They took turns to affirm and deny. Roitman was inhibited by his
mathematical training but spurred on by hope of promotion. Rubin’s
disinterested desire to establish the new science on solid foundations was
sobering, but he risked being carried away by his Five-Year Plan training and
his duty to the Party. In the end, they settled for a short list of five suspects,
agreeing without much discussion that there was no need to tape the voices of
the four detained at Sokolniki underground station—they had been arrested too
late anyway—nor those of the handful of Ministry of State Security personnel
offered by Bulbanyuk as a last resort. They also ruled out, as psychologically
implausible, the supposition that the caller was not the person who knew the
facts but someone acting for him.
Even with just five, they had their work cut out. They listened to all five
voices live and compared them with that of the culprit. Then they repeated the
process, using audiovisual tapes.
“Look what a great help audiovisual analysis is!” Rubin declared
enthusiastically. “You can tell that the criminal begins by trying to disguise his
voice. But how does the change show on the audiovisual tape? All that
happens is that the frequencies are lower, but the characteristic vocal tune
hasn’t changed! That is our main discovery—the vocal tune. Even if the
criminal had tried to disguise his voice throughout, he could not have
concealed its most distinctive features.”
“But we still don’t know enough about the limits within which voices can be
changed,” Roitman insisted. “It may be that the range of variability in
microintonations is very wide.”
Just listening to them, you might be unsure whether these were two different
voices or the same one, but on the audiovisual tapes differences in volume and
frequency seemed to show up more clearly. (Unfortunately, their audiovisual
recording apparatus was still crude; it distinguished too few frequency bands
and tended to indicate volume in unreadable smears. Their excuse must be that
it had not been intended for such crucial work.)
Of the five suspects, Zavarzin and Syagovity could quite confidently be
excluded (if indeed the nascent science allowed conclusions to be drawn from
a single conversation). Petrov, too, could be tentatively excluded (Rubin,
flushed with enthusiasm, rejected him outright). The voices of Volodin and
Shchevronok, however, resembled that of the criminal in the frequency of their
basic tone and shared with it certain phonemes (o, r, l, and sh) and were
similar in their specific speech tunes.
The similarity of these voices should provide a starting point for the
development of their new science—phonoscopy—and the elaboration of its
methods. Study of the fine distinctions between them should enable them to
devise and perfect the sensitive apparatus of the future. Rubin and Roitman
leaned back in their chairs with the triumphant air of creators. They could
foresee an organization similar to that which existed for fingerprints: an AllUnion
Voice Library, where the voice patterns of all who had ever come under
suspicion would be on record. Any criminal conversation could be recorded,
referred to the audiovisual archive—and the criminal would instantly be
identified as surely as the thief who leaves his fingerprints on the door of a
safe.
At this point, Oskolupov’s adjutant looked around the door to warn them that
his boss would be along shortly.
This brought them to their senses. Science was all very well, but right now
they must formulate their conclusions and defend them with a single voice
before the head of the department.
Roitman believed, in fact, that what they had achieved was important enough
in itself. But knowing that his masters liked certainties not hypotheses, he gave
in to Rubin, agreed to consider Petrov’s voice above suspicion and to report to
the major general that Shchevronok and Volodin were the only suspects
remaining. These two must be further examined in the next few days.
There was one complicating factor; according to information received, two
of the three rejected, Syagovity and Petrov, didn’t know a word of any foreign
language, whereas Shchevronok spoke English and Dutch, and Volodin spoke
French like a native, fluent English, and a little Italian. It seemed improbable
that at the critical moment when mutual incomprehension threatened to
terminate the conversation, a man who knew his listener’s language would
have uttered not so much as an impatient exclamation in it.
“In addition to everything else, Lev Grigorievich,” Roitman mused, “we must
not overlook the psychological aspect. We must try to imagine what sort of man
could bring himself to make such a telephone call. What was his motive? Then
compare our imaginary picture of him with the concrete images we have of the
suspects. We must ensure that in future we phonoscopists are supplied not only
with a suspect’s voice and name but with a brief account of his position, his
activities, his lifestyle, perhaps even a curriculum vitae. I think I could
construct some sort of psychological sketch of our criminal right now. . . .”
But Rubin, who only the night before, arguing with the artist, had said that
objective knowledge is uncolored by emotional preconceptions, had already
decided in favor of one of the two suspects.
“I have, of course, already given some thought to the psychological aspects,
Adam Veniaminovich, and they seem to tip the balance in favor of Volodin. In
his conversation with his wife . . .” (Volodin’s conversation with his wife had
influenced Lev more than he realized. Her musical telephone voice had
troubled his senses. If anything was to be appended to the tape, Lev would
have opted for a photograph of Volodin’s wife) “. . . in his conversation with
his wife, Volodin seems notably listless, subdued, apathetic even, and this is
very characteristic of a criminal afraid that he is under observation. There’s
nothing of the sort in Shchevronok’s cheerful Sunday chatter, I quite agree. But
a pretty pair we will look if we start relying from the word ‘go’ on extraneous
considerations rather than the objective data of our science. I’ve got quite a lot
of experience of work with audiovisual records by now, and you must believe
me: A number of subtle indications convince me beyond doubt that the criminal
is Shchevronok. Only shortage of time has prevented me from measuring these
clues on the tape and translating them into the language of numbers.”
(Something for which this “arts man” never had time!) “But if somebody took
me by the throat here and now and told me to mention just one name and swear
that he’s the criminal, I would almost without hesitation name Shchevronok!”
“But that’s not what we’re going to do, Lev Grigorievich. Let’s get to work
with the gauge and do our translation into the language of numbers; then we can
talk.”
“Think how long it will take! It’s supposed to be urgent!”
“But if the truth demands it?”
“Look for yourself, then; just look for yourself!”
Rubin fingered the tapes again, showering ash on them, heatedly insisting on
Shchevronok’s guilt.
Oskolupov found them engaged in this when he stomped in authoritatively on
his short legs. They all knew him well, and the hat pulled down over his brow
and the curl of his upper lip told them that he was acutely dissatisfied.
They jumped up, and he sat in a corner of the sofa, thrust his hands into his
pockets, and growled at them.
“Well?”
It was an order.
Rubin behaved correctly and left it to Roitman.
As Roitman made his report, Oskolupov’s flabby face was expressive of
deep thought, his eyelids were sleepily lowered, and he didn’t even rise to
look at the specimens of tape presented to him.
Rubin listened to Roitman, and his heart sank. Even in the carefully chosen
words of this clever man, the essence, the inspiration of his research had been
missed. Roitman summed up by saying that Shchevronok and Volodin were the
suspects, but further recorded conversations were needed to make a final
judgment possible. After which, he looked at Rubin and said, “But perhaps Lev
Grigorievich wants to add something or make a correction?”
Rubin regarded Oskolupov as a blockhead, pure and simple. But then and
there he was also the eye of the state, the representative of Soviet power, and
the unwitting representative of all those forces of progress to which Rubin had
surrendered himself. So Rubin spoke passionately, flourishing tapes and
albums of audiovisual recordings. He begged the general to understand that
although their present conclusion left two possibilities, there was nothing
uncertain about the science of phonoscopy itself; it was just that the time
allowed was too short for a definitive conclusion, and more recordings were
needed; but his personal tentative conclusion was that. . . .
The boss, no longer half asleep, listened for a while with a contemptuous
frown before interrupting Rubin’s explanation.
“I don’t need all this if-ing and but-ing. I don’t give a damn for your socalled
science. I want to catch the criminal. Give it to me straight. You’ve got
the criminal here, on this table, right? He isn’t walking around scot-free?
Somebody else—not one of these five?”
He glowered at them while they stood before him with nothing to support
them. The paper tapes Rubin was holding trailed on the floor. Behind their
backs, Smolosidov crouched over the tape recorder like a black dragon.
Rubin felt deflated. He had expected the conversation to go quite differently.
Roitman, who was more accustomed to the manners of the boss class,
plucked up courage and said, “Yes, Foma Guryanovich. I really am . . . we
really are. . . . We’re sure that . . . it’s between these five.”
(What else could he say?)
Oskolupov screwed up his eyes more tightly.
“You take full responsibility for what you’re saying?”
“Yes, we . . . yes . . . we take responsibility. . . .”
Oskolupov struggled up from the sofa.
“I didn’t force you to say it, mind. I’m going straight to the minister to make
my report. We’ll arrest both the sons of bitches!”
(From the way he said it and the hostile look he gave them, Rubin and
Roitman might as well be the two to be arrested).
Rubin protested.
“Wait a bit longer. Just another twenty-four hours. Give us a chance to prove
it conclusively.”
“Well, when the interrogation begins, we’ll put a microphone on the
interrogator’s desk and you can record them for three hours at a time if you
like.”
“But one of them has to be innocent!” Rubin exclaimed.
“What’s that mean—innocent?” Oskolupov’s green eyes opened wide in
surprise. “Not guilty of anything at all? Security will know how to deal with it;
they’ll find something.”
He left with never a kind word for the adepts of the new science.
That was Oskolupov’s managerial style: Never praise your subordinates if
you want them to work harder. It was not a style he himself had invented. It had
been handed down from on high, by the Man himself.
They sat down on the very chairs on which not so long ago they had dreamed
of a great future for their embryonic science. And were silent.
It was as though what they had constructed with such precision and delicacy
of touch had been trampled underfoot. As though phonoscopy were not wanted
at all.
If two could be arrested instead of one, why not all five to make absolutely
sure?
Roitman felt keenly how precarious the new group was, remembered that
half of the Acoustics Lab had been disbanded, remembered yet again his
uneasy feeling in the small hours that the world was a bleak place and he was
alone in it.
As for Rubin, the enthusiasm that had kept him working, hour after hour, lost
to the world, had burned itself out. He remembered his aching liver, his aching
head, remembered that his hair was falling out, that his wife was getting older,
that he still had five years to serve, that with every year the apparatchiks, damn
them, were driving the Revolution deeper and deeper into the morass—and
now they’d made a pariah of Yugoslavia.
Both Roitman and Rubin kept their thoughts to themselves and sat there in
silence.
Smolosidov, with his eyes on the backs of their heads, was also silent.
Rubin had been quick to pin up a map of China on the wall, with the territory
held by the Communists colored with a red pencil.
This map, at least, was heartwarming. In spite of everything, in spite of
everything—we are winning!
A KNOCK ATTHE DOOR SUMMONED ROITMAN. The joint Party and Komsomol
political education session was just beginning.
He had to round up his subordinates and put in an appearance himself.