Chapter-03-Sharashka

“NEW BOYS!”
“They’ve brought us some new boys!”
“Where are you from, comrades?”
“Friends, then, where are you from?”
“What are those patches on your chests and on your caps?”
“That’s where our numbers were. We had them on our backs and our knees as
well. They ripped them off when they sent us out of the camp.”
“What do you mean, numbers?”
“What century are we living in? Numbers sewn on human beings? Tell me,
Lev Grigorievich, is this what you call progress?”
“Valentin, old buddy, don’t try starting anything; go and get your supper.”
“I don’t feel like supper when I know that people are walking around
somewhere with numbers on their foreheads!”
“Friends! You’re getting nine packs of Belomors apiece for the second half
of December. You’re in luck.”
“What sort of Belomors? Java or Ducat?”
“Half and half.”
“Dirty bums. It’s poison gas, that Ducat. I’ll complain to the minister—I give
you my word I will.”
“What are those overalls you’re wearing? Why are you all decked out like
parachutists?”
“It’s a sort of uniform they’ve introduced. They used to issue worsted suits
and good overcoats, but the bastards are cutting back on us now.”
“Look! New boys!”
“They’ve brought us a new batch!”
“What’s the matter with you supermen? Never seen a real live zek before?
What are you blocking the hallway for?”
“Well, well! Who’s this I see? Dof-Donskoy!? Where’ve you been all this
time, Dof? I looked all over Vienna for you in ’45—all over Vienna!”
“Never seen such a ragged, unshaven lot. Which camp have you come from,
friends?”
“From different camps. Rechlag . . .”
“. . . Dubrovlag. . . .”
“Never heard of them, and I’ve been inside nine years.”
“They’re new ones—special camps, they’re called. They were only started
in ’48.”
“They grabbed me and slung me into the meat wagon right outside the
entrance to the Prater in Vienna.”
“Hang on, Mitya, let’s hear what the new boys have to say.”
“No, let’s get some exercise! And a breath of fresh air! Lev will debrief the
new boys, never fear.”
“Second shift! Suppertime!”
“Ozerlag, Luglag, Steplag, Kamyshlag. . . .”
“Makes you think there’s some unrecognized poet sitting in the Ministry of
State Security. He hasn’t got the stamina for whole poems, can’t get it together,
so he thinks up poetic names for prison camps.”
“Ha-ha-ha! It’s a funny world, men, a mighty funny world! What century are
we living in?”
“Keep it down a bit, Valentin, boy!”
“Excuse me—what’s your name?”
“Lev Grigorievich.”
“Are you an engineer as well?”
“No, I’m a linguist.”
“Linguist? They even have linguists in this place?”
“Better ask who they don’t have here. There are mathematicians, physicists,
chemists, radio engineers, telephone engineers, designers, artists, translators,
bookbinders—they even shipped in a geologist by mistake.”
“So what does he do?”
“He’s all right; he got himself fixed up in the photography lab. There’s even
an architect. A pretty special one at that! Stalin’s personal architect. Built all
his dachas for him. Now he’s inside with us.”
“Lev! You pose as a materialist, but you’re always ramming spiritual
pabulum down people’s throats! Listen, friends! When they march you into the
mess hall, we’ve set out about thirty plates for you on the last table by the
window. Chow down all you can hold; just make sure your bellies don’t
burst!”
“Thanks very much, but aren’t you robbing yourselves?”
“Costs us nothing. Anyway, who eats pickled herring and millet mush
nowadays? Too, too common!”
“What did you say? Millet mush common? It’s five years since I saw any!”
“It probably isn’t millet but magara.”
“Magara? Are you crazy? Just let them try magara on us, and see what we’d
do to them!”
“What’s the food like in transit prisons nowadays?”
“Well, in Chelyabinsk—”
“The old prison or the new one?”
“I can see you’re an expert. The new one—”
“Are they still economizing on bathrooms upstairs? Do they still make the
zeks carry garbage buckets three stories down?”
“Yes, it’s just the same.”
“You said this place is a sharashka? What’s that mean—sharashka?”
“How much bread do you get here?”
“Who hasn’t had supper yet? Second sitting!”
“We get four hundred grams of white bread per man, and there’s black bread
on the tables.”
“What d’you mean, on the tables?”
“What I say. It’s there on the tables, ready cut. If you want it you can take it;
if you don’t you needn’t.”
“You mean we’re in Europe here or what?”
“Not quite Europe. You get white bread on the table there, not black.”
“Ah, but we break our backs working twelve or fourteen hours a day for
those Belomor cigarettes and a bit of butter.”
“Sitting at a desk all day? Call that backbreaking work? Swinging a pick,
now that’ll give you a backache!”
“Sitting in this sharashka, God knows, is like being stuck in a swamp. You’re
cut off from the land of the living. Did you hear that, gentlemen? It seems
they’ve taken a firm line with the baddies, and you don’t get mugged even in
Krasnaya Presnya nowadays.”
“Professors get forty grams of the best butter, engineers twenty. From each
according to his ability, to each according to what is available.”
“So you worked on the Dnieper Dam?”
“Yes, I worked for Winter. It’s the Dnieper Dam that landed me inside.”
“How did that happen, then?”
“Well, I’ll tell you. I sold it to the Germans.”
“The Dnieper Hydroelectric Station?”
“Come on—it was blown up!”
“So what? I sold it to them after it was blown up.”
“Honestly, it’s like a breath of fresh air! Transit camps! Prison trucks!
Camps! Keep moving! Sovietskaya Gavan, here I come!”
“And back again. Val boy, right back here.”
“Yes! Back in a hurry, of course!”
“Do you know, Lev Grigorievich, this rush of impressions, this change of
scenery is making my head spin. I’ve lived fifty-two years, recovered twice
from fatal illnesses, been married twice to rather pretty women, fathered sons,
been published in seven languages, received academic prizes, and never have I
been so blissfully happy as today! What a place! To think that tomorrow I
won’t be driven into icy water! I’ll get forty grams of butter! There’ll be black
bread on the tables! Books aren’t forbidden! You can shave yourself! Guards
don’t beat zeks! What a great day! What radiant heights! Maybe I’m dead?
Maybe I’m dreaming? I feel as though I am in heaven!”
“No, my dear sir, you are still in hell, only you’ve ascended to its highest and
best circle—the first. You were asking what a sharashka is. You could say it
was invented by Dante. He was at his wits’ end as to where to put the ancient
sages. It was his Christian duty to consign those heathens to hell. But a
Renaissance conscience couldn’t reconcile itself to lumping those luminaries
in with the rest of the sinners and condemning them to physical torment. So
Dante imagined a special place for them in hell. Let’s see. . . . It goes
something like this:
“We reached the base of a great Citadel . . .
“Look around at the old arches here!
“Circled by seven towering battlements . . .
Through seven gates I entered with those sages. . . .
“You came here in the Black Marias, so you didn’t see the gates—”
“There with a solemn and majestic poise
stood many people gathered in the light . . .
with neither joy nor sorrow in their bearing. . . .
I half-saw, half-sensed,
what quality of souls lived in that light. . . .
What souls are these whose merit lights their way
even in Hell? What joy sets them apart?”
“Ach, Lev Grigorievich, I can explain it in a way that the professor will
much more readily understand. You need only read Pravda’s front page: ‘It has
been shown that a good fleece of wool depends on the feeding and general care
of the sheep.’ ”