Chapter-54-Leisure-Amusements

NOWHERE COULD THOUGHTS MOVE MORE FREELY and merrily than under the
high vaulted ceiling over the altar in the semicircular room on the second floor.
All twenty-five inmates had assembled by six o’clock. Some hastily stripped
to their underwear, eager to shed their irksome prison skins, and flopped
heavily on their bunks or scrambled aloft like monkeys. Others flopped without
removing their overalls; one or two stood up above waving their arms and
shouting to friends across the room; yet others, in no hurry to do anything,
shuffled around looking at nothing in particular, savoring in advance the
pleasurable hours of freedom ahead, and uncertain what would be the
pleasantest way to begin.
One such was Isaak Kagan, the short, black-haired “manager of the
accumulator shop,” as they called him. He was in a particularly good mood
because he had come into a spacious well-lit room from the dark and badly
ventilated battery-charging room in the cellar, where he lurked like a mole
fourteen hours a day. He was nonetheless content to work in the cellar, saying
that in a camp he would have folded up long ago. (He never behaved like those
big-mouths who boast that they “lived better in the camp than outside.”)
Outside, Isaak Kagan had begun by dropping out of an engineering course,
then working in an engineering supply depot, doing his best to live a modest
and inconspicuous life, negotiating the Epoch of Great Achievements
unnoticed. He knew that it was both safer and more lucrative to remain
inconspicuous. But his buttoned-up exterior concealed a burning passion for
gain. Moneygrubbing was his full-time occupation. Political activity held no
attraction for him. He did observe the Sabbath as best he could, even in the
storeroom. But for some reason the MGB had chosen Kagan as one of its
wheelhorses and began cornering him in locked rooms and innocent-looking
meeting places, pressing him to become a stoolie. Kagan found this revolting.
He lacked the candor and the courage (who did not?) to fling their loathsome
proposal in their faces, but, inexhaustibly patient, he remained silent, mumbled
incomprehensibly, played for time, evaded their questions, fidgeted on his
chair, and somehow avoided signing any undertaking. Not that he was
altogether incapable of informing. He would have informed without a qualm on
anyone who had harmed or insulted him. But the idea of denouncing people
who were kind to him, or neither kind nor unkind, nauseated him.
The MGB noted his obstinacy and bided its time. You can’t guard against
every eventuality. His fellow workers at the depot got talking one day.
Somebody beefed about the tools; somebody else about the supply system; a
third person about the planners. Isaak didn’t so much as open his mouth but
went on jotting down requisitions with a copying pencil. The bosses got to
know about it (they’d probably masterminded it all anyway); every worker
made a statement on what each of the others had said, and every one of them
got ten years under Article 58, section 10. Kagan, too, went through five
confrontations, but nobody could prove that he had said a single word. If
Article 58 had been a little less elastic, they would have had to let Kagan go.
But the investigator had one final weapon in reserve: point 12 of that article,
on failure to inform. It was for his failure to inform that they had stitched
Kagan up with an astronomical ten years of his own.
His remarkable mother wit had gotten Kagan out of a camp into the
sharashka. At an awkward moment when he had been dismissed from the job
of “deputy hut orderly” and was about to be banished to a lumber camp, he
addressed a letter to the chairman of the Council of Ministers, Comrade Stalin,
saying that if the government would provide him, Isaak Kagan, with the
opportunity, he would undertake to devise a system of remote control for
torpedo boats.
His reasoning was sound. No one in the government would have felt the
slightest twinge of sympathy if Kagan had written as if to fellow human beings,
telling them how very bad things were with him and begging them to save him.
But for the sake of a major military invention, it was worth bringing the writer
to Moscow immediately. Kagan was taken to Marfino, and a variety of bigwigs
with light or dark blue epaulets came visiting and urged him to embody his
audacious technical concept in a finished product. Kagan, however, was now
in receipt of white bread with butter and in no hurry. He replied with
impressive sangfroid that he was not a torpedo artificer and naturally required
the help of such a person. After another two months, they produced a torpedo
expert (also a zek). Whereupon Kagan patiently explained that he was not a
marine engineer and would naturally need help from someone of that sort.
After another two months, they delivered a marine engineer (yet another zek).
Kagan said with a sigh that radio was not his specialty. There were lots of
radio engineers in Marfino, and one of them was immediately attached to
Kagan. Kagan assembled his team and in a quiet, level voice, so that no one
could suspect him of mockery, made this announcement: “Well, friends, now
that you have all been brought together, you can, by pooling your efforts, easily
invent a system of radio control for torpedo boats. I would not presume to
advise you, the experts, as to the best way of doing it.” All three were in fact
dispatched to a naval sharashka. As for Kagan, he had made a niche for himself
in the battery-charging room while he had been playing for time, and
everybody had gotten used to him.
Kagan was now badgering Rubin, who was lying on his bunk, but from a
distance so that Rubin could not reach him with a kick.
“Lev Grigorievich,” he said. His speech was thick and rather indistinct but
unhurried. “Your sense of duty to society has clearly declined. The masses
thirst for entertainment. Only you can supply it, yet you have buried your nose
in a book.”
Rubin waved him away. “Isaak, you can go to . . .” He had settled down to
read, lying on his belly, with his camp vest draped over the shoulders of his
overalls (the window between him and Sologdin was open “one Mayakovsky,”
and there was an agreeable breeze with a hint of fresh snow).
Kagan doggedly persisted. “No, seriously, Lev Grigorievich. We would all
very much like to hear your talented ‘Crow and Fox’ again.”
“And who told tales to the godfather about it?” Rubin snapped. “Was it you?”
To amuse his public the previous Sunday evening, Rubin had improvised a
skit on Krylov’s fable “The Crow and the Fox,” replete with camp slang and
expressions unsuitable for women’s ears, which had earned him five encores
and a hoisting, but on Monday Major Myshin had sent for him and interrogated
him on a charge of corrupting morals, in connection with which depositions
had been extracted from several witnesses, and the original of the fable,
together with a written explanation, from Rubin.
After lunch this Saturday, Rubin had put in two hours’ work in the new room
allotted to him, identified the wanted criminal’s typical “speech tune” and
“bands of resonance,” run them through the “visible speech” apparatus, hung
the wet tapes up to dry, and formed some preliminary conjectures and
suspicions, but was still not particularly excited about his new line of work
when he watched Smolosidov sealing the room for the night. After this, Rubin
had joined the stream of zeks on their way to the prison building like cattle
returning to the village at night.
As always, he had under his pillow, under his mattress, under his bed, and in
his locker, higgledy-piggledy with his food, a dozen or so extremely interesting
books—interesting, that is, to him alone, which is why they were not stolen.
There were Chinese-French, Latvian-Hungarian, and Russian-Sanskrit
dictionaries. Rubin had been busy for two years with a grandiose work in the
spirit of Marx and Engels, tracing all words in all languages to the concepts
“hand” and “manual labor.” (He had no inkling that the Coryphaeus of
Linguistic Science had the night before raised the headman’s ax over
Academician Marr.) He also had ˇCapek’s War with the Newts, a collection of
stories by very progressive (i.e., pro-Communist) Japanese writers,
Hemingway’s For Whom the Bell Tolls in English (he had ceased to be
progressive, so Russian translation was lagging), a novel by Upton Sinclair
that had never been translated into Russian, and Colonel Lawrence’s memoirs
in German, acquired as part of the confiscated property of the Lorenz company.
There was an enormous number of books, indispensable books, books of the
first importance in the world, and his greed for them had made it impossible
for Rubin to produce one of his own. Right now he was ready to go on and on
reading long after midnight, with never a thought of the working day ahead. But
Rubin was also at his wittiest and his appetite for argument and oratory keenest
in the evening, so that it didn’t take much to mobilize these talents in the
service of the public. There were people in the sharashka who did not trust
Rubin, taking him for a stoolie (because of his ultra-Marxist views, which he
did not conceal), but there was no one in the place who did not delight in his
powers of invention.
The memory of “The Crow and the Fox,” embellished with clever
borrowings from criminal slang, was so vivid that many of those in the room
loudly seconded Kagan’s plea for some new gag. And when Rubin, morose and
bearded, raised himself and emerged as if from a cave from the cover afforded
by the bunk above him, they all abandoned whatever they were doing and
prepared to listen. All except Dvoetyosov on his top bunk, who went on cutting
his toenails so savagely that clippings flew into the distance, and Abramson
under his blanket, who did not look up from his book. Curious people from
other rooms blocked the doorways, and one of them, the Tatar Bulatov in his
horn-rimmed spectacles, rapped out: “Come on, Lyova! Let’s have it!”
Rubin had no wish at all to gratify people most of whom hated or despised
all that was dear to him; he knew, too, that another jape would inevitably mean
more unpleasantness no later than Monday, more nervous strain, further
interrogation by “Shishkin-Myshkin.” But Rubin was the proverbial hero who
would sacrifice his own father for the sake of a funny remark, so he pretended
to frown, cast an expert eye over his audience, and said in the sudden hush:
“Comrades! I am amazed by your frivolity. How can you think of fun when
brazen criminals are at large among us, as yet undetected? No society can
flourish without a just legal system. I consider it necessary to begin our
evening with a modest trial. As a warm-up.”
“Good idea!”
“Whom shall we try?”
There was a chorus of “Doesn’t matter who!” “Comes to the same thing!”
“Amusing! Most amusing!” Sologdin said encouragingly, making himself
comfortable. He had earned his evening’s rest as never before and needed
entertainment.
Cautious Kagan, sensing that the game he had started might overstep the
boundaries of discretion, faded from the foreground and sat on his bed.
“The identity of the defendant you will learn as the trial proceeds,” Rubin
announced. (He hadn’t yet decided himself.) “I may as well be public
prosecutor, since that office has always aroused very special emotions in me.”
(Everybody in the sharashka knew that certain prosecutors were among
Rubin’s pet hates and that he had for five years been engaged in single combat
with the All-Union and with the Main Military Prosecution Services.)
“Gleb! You’ll be presiding judge. Choose yourself two colleagues quickly.
They must be impartial, objective, and, in a word, completely subservient to
your will.”
Nerzhin had slipped off his shoes down below and was sitting on his top
bunk. As Sunday went by and the familiar prison world closed in around him,
his meeting with Nadya seemed more and more remote. In response to Rubin’s
call, he drew himself up to the rails at the end of the bed and let his feet dangle
between them, so that he appeared to be seated on a judicial bench looking
down on the room.
“All right—where are my assessors? Get up here!”
A lot of prisoners had gathered in the room, and they all wanted to listen to
the trial, but nobody wanted to be an assessor, whether out of caution or from
fear of looking ridiculous. To one side of Nerzhin, on another top bunk, lay
Zemelya the vacuum man, reading his morning paper again.
“Ulyba!” Nerzhin said, tugging at the paper. “You’ve educated yourself
enough. The way you’re going, you’ll be wanting to rule the world soon. Tuck
your legs under and be a jury man!”
Applause was heard from below. “Come on, Zemelya!”
Zemelya thawed easily and could not resist for long. All smiles, he hung his
balding head over the bedrail and said: “To be the people’s choice is a great
honor! Just think what you’re doing, friends! I have no education; I don’t know
how. . . .”
General laughter (“None of us know how; we’re all only learners!”) greeted
his objection, and he was duly elected.
To the other side of Nerzhin lay Ruska Doronin. He had undressed, covered
himself from head to foot with his blanket, and hidden his ecstatically happy
face under a pillow. He didn’t want to hear or see anything or to be seen. Only
his body was there; his thoughts and his feelings were following Klara on her
way home. She had finished braiding the basket for the tree and presented it
discreetly to Ruska just before she left. He was holding it under the blanket and
kissing it.
Realizing that it would be pointless to try to stir Ruska, Nerzhin looked
around for someone else.
He called to Bulatov. “Amantai! Amantai! Come and join the jury!”
Bulatov’s eyes flashed mischievously. “I would, only there’s nowhere to sit!
I’ll stay here by the door and be bailiff.”
Khorobrov (by this time he had given Abramson and two others their haircuts
and set to work on a new client, who was sitting in the middle of the room
stripped to the waist to save him the trouble of removing hairs from his
underclothes later) shouted out, “Who needs two jury men? You’ve got the
verdict up your sleeve anyway. One’s enough! Get the show on the road!”
“He’s right, you know,” Nerzhin said. “Why pay a man for nothing? So
where’s the defendant? Bailliff, bring in the defendant! Silence in court!”
He rapped on the bed frame with his large cigarette holder. The talking died
down.
There were calls of “Get on with the trial!”
Some of the public remained standing; others were seated.
“Yea, though I ascend into the heavens, Thou art there; though I descend into
hell, Thou art there,” Potapov intoned in a lugubrious voice from below the
presiding judge’s seat. “Though I make my abode in the depths of the sea, even
there Thy right hand will discover me!” (Potapov had picked up a little
scripture in his pre-Revolutionary secondary school, and his precise
engineer’s mind had preserved the words of the prayer book.)
Also down below, under the jury man, the rattle of a spoon stirring tea was
distinctly heard.
“Valentulya!” Nerzhin shouted threateningly. “How many times have you
been told not to rattle your spoon?”
“Put him on trial,” Bulatov yelled, and several obliging hands dragged
Pryanchikov from the twilight of his lower bunk into the middle of the room.
“Cut it out!” Pryanchikov struggled furiously to free himself. “I’ve had
enough of public prosecutors! I’m sick and tired of courts and courtrooms!
What right does any man have to sit in judgment on another? Ha-ha! It’s
ridiculous! I despise you, you pipsqueak!” he yelled at the presiding judge. I
don’t give a . . . for you!”
While Nerzhin had been putting his makeshift court together, Rubin had
thought it all out. His dark brown eyes shone with the light of inspiration. He
absolved Pryanchikov with a magnanimous gesture.
“Release that fledgling! Valentulya, with his passion for universal justice,
will do very well as official defense counsel! Give him a chair!”
There is in every joke an elusive moment at which it either becomes crude
and offensive or is transmuted by inspiration. Rubin draped a blanket round his
shoulders like a robe, climbed onto a locker in his stockinged feet, and
addressed the presiding judge. “State Counselor of Justice! The defendant has
failed to present himself and will be tried in absentia. Let us begin!”
Spiridon, the yardman with the ginger mustache, was one of the crowd in the
doorway. His pendulous cheeks were scored with harsh wrinkles; but,
strangely, merriment was always about to break out of the net. He scowled at
the officers of the court.
Behind Spiridon the long, fine-drawn, waxy face and woolen ski cap of
Professor Chelnov could be seen.
Nerzhin called the court to order in a rasping voice: “Your attention,
Comrades! The military tribunal of the Marfino sharashka is now in session.
The case before us is that of—”
The prosecutor supplied a name: “Olgovich, Igor Svyatoslavich.”
Nerzhin caught on and continued in a nasal drawl, as if reading: “The case
before us is that of Olgovich, Igor Svyatoslavich, prince of Novgorod-Seversk
and Putivl, approximate date of birth . . . Clerk of the Court, why the devil is it
only approximate? . . . Attention! In view of the fact that the court has nothing
in writing before it, the prosecutor will read the indictment.”