Chapter-32-On-the-Path-to-a-Million

OLD PROFESSOR CHELNOV, a mathematician well known in many sharashkas,
who used to enter in the “nationality” column not “Russian” but “zek” and who
in 1950 was nearing the end of his eighteenth year of imprisonment, had
applied the fine point of his pencil to many technical inventions, from the
continuously operating boiler to the jet engine, and had invested a bit of his
soul in some of them.
Incidentally, Professor Chelnov maintained that the expression “invest one’s
soul” should be used with care, since only zeks certainly had immortal souls,
which were denied to “frees” because of their worldliness. In friendly
conversation with other zeks over a bowl of ice-cold congealing porridge or a
steaming glass of cocoa, Chelnov did not disguise the fact that he had
borrowed this thought from Pierre Bezukhov. When the French soldier would
not let Pierre cross the road, he, as everybody knows, burst out laughing. “Ha
ha! The soldier wouldn’t let me cross! Me? He wouldn’t let my immortal soul
cross!”
Professor Chelnov was the only prisoner at Marfino excused from wearing
overalls. (Abakumov himself had been asked to authorize it.) The weightiest
argument for this concession was that Chelnov was not a permanent Marfino
zek but an itinerant zek; once a corresponding member of the Academy of
Sciences and director of a mathematical institute, he took his orders from Beria
in person and could be dispatched to any sharashka confronted by a
particularly urgent mathematical problem. Having solved it in outline and
showed his hosts how to complete the calculation, he would be transferred
elsewhere.
Chelnov did not, as any normally vain person would, make the most of his
freedom to dress as he pleased. He wore an inexpensive suit, and the jacket
and trousers were not even identical in color. He always wore felt boots. Over
the few gray hairs left to him he tugged a nondescript woolen cap, knitted
perhaps for a skier or a little girl. But his most distinctive article of dress was
a weird woolen traveling shawl, pinned in two thicknesses around his
shoulders and his back and somewhat resembling a woman’s warm shawl.
Chelnov, however, could wear that cap and that shawl in a way that made
him not a ridiculous but a majestic figure. His long, oval face, his sharp
profile, his authoritative way of speaking to the administration, and that faint
blue haze in his faded eyes, which is peculiar to those capable of abstract
thought, made Chelnov strangely like Descartes or perhaps Archimedes.
Chelnov had been sent to Marfino to work out the mathematical principles of
a fully reliable Scrambler: an apparatus that by its automatic rotation would
switch banks of relays on and off, and so confuse and distort normal speech
that hundreds of people equipped with analogous mechanisms would not be
able to decipher the conversation traveling along the wires. Research into the
design problems of a mechanism of this sort was in progress in the design
office. Two other designers, besides Sologdin, were working on it.
The moment he arrived in the sharashka from a camp on the Inta, Sologdin
took a look around and promptly told them all that his memory was impaired
by long starvation and his faculties, congenitally limited in any case, blunted,
so that he was in no condition to do anything but subsidiary work. He could
afford to take such a bold line because he had not been put on “general duties”
in the camp but had been given a comfortable engineering job and was not
afraid of being sent back. (For the same reason, when discussing work with his
superiors in the sharashka, he could afford to keep them waiting while he
thought up substitutes for such foreign words as “engineer” and “metal.” This
would have been impossible if he had aspired to promotion, or even to better
rations.) He was not, however, sent away but kept at Marfino on probation. He
had escaped from the mainstream, where tension, rush, and nervous strain
prevailed, into a quiet backwater. There, without honor but without fear of
censure, he was under very lax supervision, and he had enough free time in the
evening, when no guard was watching, to begin working along his own lines on
a fully efficient Scrambler.
He believed that great ideas dawned only in isolated minds.
Sure enough, during the last six months he had hit on the solution that
completely eluded the ten engineers specially chosen—and incessantly
pressured and harassed—to look for it. (He kept his ears open and heard how
they were looking at the problem and where they had gone wrong.) Two days
earlier Sologdin had given his work to Professor Chelnov for an opinion, also
unofficially. Now he was climbing the stairs side by side with the professor,
respectfully supporting him by the elbow and awaiting his verdict.
Chelnov, however, never let work and leisure interfere with each other.
During their brief journey along hallways and up stairways, he did not give
away by so much as a word the appraisal that Sologdin so eagerly awaited.
Instead he talked in a carefree way about his morning walk with Lev Rubin.
When Rubin had been turned away from “the wood,” he had recited to Chelnov
a poem of his on a biblical subject. There were only a couple of metrical
faults, there were original rhymes, such as “Osiris” and “oh see this,” and on
the whole he was bound to say that the poem wasn’t bad. In ballad form it told
the story of Moses leading the Jews for forty years through the wilderness,
suffering hunger and thirst and other privations, until the people became
delirious and rebelled—but they were not in the right; Moses was right,
because he knew that in the end they would reach the promised land. Rubin
was particularly anxious to impress on his listener that “it hasn’t been forty
years for us yet.”
So what had Chelnov said to that?
He had directed Rubin’s attention to the geography of Moses’ transit. To get
from the Nile to Jerusalem, the Jews had no need at all to walk more than four
hundred kilometers, so that even resting on the Sabbath, they could easily have
gotten there in three weeks! Must we not therefore suppose that for the
remainder of the forty years Moses was leading them not through the Arabian
desert but around and around in the Arabian desert, until all those who
remembered their well-fed Egyptian servitude would have died off and the
survivors would appreciate so much more the modest paradise that Moses
would be able to offer them?
Professor Chelnov took the key to his room from the orderly at the door to
Yakonov’s office. No other prisoner, except the Iron Mask, was trusted that far.
No zek had the right to remain in his working quarters for a single second
unsupervised by a free employee, since an elementary concern for security
suggested that a prisoner would inevitably take advantage of a single second
free from surveillance to break open the safe with the aid of a pencil and
photograph secret documents with the aid of a trouser button.
Chelnov, however, worked in a room where there was nothing but an
unlocked cupboard and two bare desks. So they had decided (after consulting
the ministry, of course) to sanction the issue of a key to Professor Chelnov
personally. Ever since, his room had been the cause of perpetual anxiety to the
institute’s security officer, Major Shikin. During the hours when prisoners
were locked in the prison behind a double steel-reinforced door, this highly
paid comrade with the irregular working hours would come to the professor’s
room on his very own feet to sound the walls, jump up and down on the
floorboards, peer into the dusty gap behind the cupboard, and shake his head
somberly.
And just getting his own key wasn’t the end of it. Four or five doors along the
hallway on the third floor the Top-Secret Department had its sentry post. This
consisted of a small table with a chair beside it and on the chair a cleaning
woman, not just a woman to sweep the floor and make tea, but rather a specialpurpose
cleaning woman to check the passes of people on their way to the TopSecret
Department. These passes, printed in the ministry’s main printshop,
were of three kinds: permanent, weekly, and valid for one occasion, all
designed by Major Shikin (whose idea it had been to make the dead end of the
hallway top secret).
The work of the checkpoint was not easy; people didn’t go by very often, but
knitting socks was categorically forbidden, both by the regulations hanging
there on the wall and by repeated oral instructions from Comrade Major
Shikin. The cleaning women (there were two of them, each working a twelvehour
shift), spent their duty hours in an excruciating struggle against sleep.
Colonel Yakonov himself also found this checkpoint a nuisance because people
kept interrupting him all day long to sign their passes.
All the same, the checkpoint remained. To cover the wages of the two
cleaning women, they kept not three yardmen, provided for in their budget, but
one, the aforementioned Spiridon.
Although Chelnov knew that the woman now sitting at the checkpoint was
called Maria Ivanovna, and although she let this gray-headed old man through
several times a day, she started and said: “Your pass.”
Chelnov showed his cardboard pass, and Sologdin produced a paper one.
They passed the checkpoint and a couple of doors—the first a glass door,
nailed up and smeared with whitewash, which led to the back stairs and the
serf-artist’s studio, then the door of the Iron Mask’s private room—and
unlocked Chelnov’s door.
It was a cozy little room with a single window giving a view of the
prisoners’ exercise yard and the clump of secular elms that fate had ruthlessly
annexed to the zone guarded by machine-gun fire. The towering treetops were
still lavishly frosted.
A dirty white sky hung over the earth.
To the left of the limes, outside the camp area, a house could be seen, gray
with age but now also frost whitened, an old two-story house with a boatshaped
roof. It had been the home of the bishop who had once lived near the
seminary, which was why the road leading to this place was called Bishop’s
Road. Farther on, the village roofs of little Marfino peeped out. Beyond that
there was open field, and farther away still on the railway line, bright silvery
steam from the Leningrad-Moscow train could be seen rising through the murk.
But Sologdin did not even glance through the window. Ignoring an invitation
to sit down, feeling his legs firm and youthful beneath him, he leaned against
the window frame and fastened his eyes on the roll of papers lying on
Chelnov’s desk.
Chelnov asked him to open the ventilation pane, sat down on a hard chair
with a high, straight back, straightened the shawl around his shoulders, opened
the list of points for discussion that he had written on a page from a scratch
pad, picked up a long, sharp-pointed pencil like a lance, looked hard at
Sologdin, and suddenly the flippant tone of their recent conversation was no
longer possible.
To Sologdin it was as though great wings were beating the air in that little
room. Chelnov spoke for no more than two minutes but so concisely that there
was no breathing space between his thoughts.
The gist of it was that he had done more than Sologdin had asked. He had
produced estimates of the theoretical and mathematical feasibility of
Sologdin’s design. The design, then, was promising, and close enough to what
was required, at least until they could switch to purely electronic equipment.
Sologdin must, however, find a way to make the device insensitive to lowenergy
impulses and determine the effect of the main inertial forces so as to
ensure adequate flywheel momentum.
“And one thing more”—Chelnov’s bright gaze dwelled briefly on Sologdin
—“one thing you mustn’t forget. Your encoding process is constructed on the
random principle, and that’s good. But a random process fixed once and for all
becomes a system. To make it absolutely secure, you must improve your
process so that the random sequence changes randomly.”
Here the professor looked thoughtful, folded his sheet of paper in two, and
fell silent. Sologdin lowered his eyelids as though dazzled and stood there
unseeing.
With the professor’s first words a hot wave of emotion had welled up in him.
Now he felt that if he did not press shoulder and ribs firmly against the
window frame, he would soar exulting to the ceiling. Perhaps his life was
approaching its zenith!
He came from an old gentry family that had long been dwindling like a spent
candle and had finally sputtered out in the fiery intensity of the Revolution.
Some of his kin were shot; others emigrated; yet others lay low or even
assumed false identities. The young Sologdin took a long time to make up his
mind about the Revolution. The rebellion of an envious mob whipped up to a
frenzy by agitators he hated, but he found something congenial in its ruthless
single-mindedness and inexhaustible energy. He worshipped, with Old Russian
fervor in his eyes, in decaying Moscow chapels. He also put on a leather
jacket, open at the neck, proletarian fashion (everybody was wearing them in
those days) and joined a primary Komsomol organization. Who could tell him
the right thing to do: whether to look for bloody vengeance on this gang of
criminals or work his way up into the Komsomol leadership? He was
sincerely devout and also helplessly vain. He was capable of sacrifice but also
fond of money. Is there any young heart that does not want the good things of
this world? He shared the belief of the godless Democritus: “Happy is the man
who has both wealth and intelligence.” Intelligence he had been born with;
wealth he lacked.
So at the age of eighteen (and in the last year of the NEP!), Sologdin made it
his chief and unconditional object to acquire a million—no more and no less,
but by hook or by crook he would have his million. It was not wealth for its
own sake he was interested in, not just having means at his disposal. This was
an examination he must pass to prove that he was no idle dreamer but a man of
action who could set himself other practical tasks.
He proposed to reach his goal by way of a dazzling invention. But he was
ready to take some other route—it need not have anything to do with
engineering—if it was shorter. But no environment could have been more
hostile to his ambition than that of Stalin’s Five-Year Plans. All he managed to
wring out of his engineering qualifications was a bread card and a pathetic
wage. And if from one day to the next he had offered the state an amazing
cross-country vehicle or a plan for the profitable restructuring of all Soviet
industry, it would have brought him neither his million nor glory but quite
probably would have invited distrust and harassment.
Doubts about his future were soon dispelled. The meshes of the net became
tighter, and a big fish like Sologdin was inevitably caught in one of its periodic
trawls. While serving his first sentence in a prison camp, he was given a
second.
It was twelve years since he had seen anything of the world outside. He
should by now have forgotten his ambition to make a million. But a strange,
labyrinthine path had led him once again to the enchanted tower! And his
trembling hands were selecting from the bunch a key to open its steel door.
Could it be to him that this Descartes in a girl’s cap was saying such
flattering things?
Chelnov had folded his list of talking points into four and then into eight.
“As you can see, there’s still quite a lot of work to be done. But this design
will be the best of all those so far submitted. It will mean your release and the
quashing of your conviction. Not to mention a share in a Stalin Prize, if the
bosses don’t intercept it!”
Chelnov smiled. His smile was as sharp and thin as his features.
The smile was for himself. He, who at various times and in various
sharashkas had done far more than Sologdin was about to do, ran no risk of
winning a prize, or a clean sheet, or his freedom. He had in fact never been
tried and convicted. He had once called the Wise Father a slimy reptile, and
for that was now spending his eighteenth year inside without having been
sentenced and without hope.
Sologdin opened his sparkling blue eyes, stood youthfully erect, and said
rather theatrically: “Vladimir Erastovich! You have given me support and
confidence! I have no words to thank you for your kindness. I am deeply
indebted to you!”
But an absent-minded smile hovered on Sologdin’s lips.
As he was returning Sologdin’s roll of papers, the professor remembered
something else.
“By the way, I owe you an apology. You asked me not to let Anton
Nikolaevich see your drawing. But yesterday it just so happened that he came
into the room in my absence, unrolled the drawing on my desk, as he always
does, and realized at once what it was all about. I had to reveal your identity.”
Sologdin’s smile gave way to a frown.
“Does it really matter all that much? Why should it? One day sooner, one day
later. . . .”
Sologdin was of two minds himself. Maybe it was time to take the drawing
to Anton?
“I don’t quite know how to put it, Vladimir Erastovich. . . . Don’t you think
there’s something morally dubious about it? After all, it isn’t a bridge or a
crane or a machine tool. The order didn’t come from industry but from the very
people who put us inside. So far I’ve been doing it just to . . . to test my
powers. Just for myself.”
Just for himself.
That was something Chelnov understood very well. The best research was
generally done that way.
“But in the circumstances isn’t that a luxury you can’t afford?”
With Chelnov’s pale, calm eyes upon him, Sologdin pulled himself together.
“Forgive me. I was just thinking aloud. Please don’t reproach yourself. I’m
endlessly grateful to you!”
He held Chelnov’s limp, fragile hand deferentially for a moment, then left
with the roll of paper under his arm.
He had entered that room a little while ago a supplicant but unburdened. He
was leaving it victorious but with heavy responsibilities, no longer master of
his time, his plans, his labor. Chelnov, meanwhile, did not lean back in his
chair but sat and sat, upright, eyes closed, lean featured, and wearing his
pointed woolen cap.