Chapter-65-A-Duel-Not-by-the-Rules

ALONE ON HIS UPPER BUNK, staring at a ceiling vaulted like the dome of
heaven or burying his head in a feverish pillow as though it were Klara’s
bosom, Rostislav felt faint with happiness. Half a day had passed since her
kiss had left him dizzy, and he was still reluctant to defile his happy lips with
idle speech or gross food.
“You couldn’t wait for me,” he had said. “You couldn’t possibly. . . .”
“Why not?” she had replied. “Of course I could.”
From below, a rich, youthful voice, muted so that it would not carry too far,
broke into his thoughts.
“Blind faith—nothing else—keeps antediluvians like you going. Your beliefs
are false, though. Your whole life long, science and you have always been
strangers.”
“Look, this argument is becoming pointless. If Marxism isn’t science, what
is? The Revelations of Saint John the Divine? Khomyakov on the Slav soul?”
“You’ve never caught as much as a whiff of real science! You people aren’t
. . . creators. So you haven’t the least idea what science really is! The subjects
of all your philosophizing are figments, not realities! Whereas in true science
all propositions derive directly from a strictly defined starting point.”
“Listen, old pal! It’s just the same with us. Our whole economic doctrine is
deduced from the nuclear concept of commodity. And our whole philosophy
stems from the three laws of the dialectic.”
“Concrete knowledge is validated by the ability to apply its findings in
practice.”
“My friend! What’s this I hear? You base your epistemology on the empirical
principle? So you’re one of nature’s materialists.” (Rubin pursed his lips to
slur the sibilants). “A rather primitive one, at that.”
“You always wriggle out of an honest man-to-man argument! You prefer to
overwhelm your interlocutor with gobbledygook!”
“While you as usual don’t just talk, you pontificate! Like the Delphic oracle!
The oracle of Marfino! What makes you think I’m so desperately keen on
arguing with you? For all you know, it may bore me as much as trying to drill it
into some old troglodyte that the sun doesn’t go round the earth. Good luck to
him, I say—if ignorance is bliss.”
“You don’t want to argue with me because you don’t know how to. None of
you do, because you avoid people who think differently, and you won’t risk
denting your nice, tidy ideology! So you get together, with no outsiders present,
to flaunt your understanding of the Founding Fathers. Each of you borrows
ideas from the others, and after a little wear they fit in nicely with his own.
Anyway, outside”—lowering his voice—“with the Cheka around, who dares
argue with you? But when you land in jail, here in Marfino, say”—speaking
normally again—“you meet people who really can argue! And you’re like fish
out of water! All you can do is yell at people and abuse them!”
“It seems to me you’ve done most of the yelling so far.”
Sologdin and Rubin, absorbed in their eternal disagreement, were still sitting
at the empty birthday table, oblivious of all else. Abramson had long since
retired to read The Count of Monte Cristo, and Kondrashov-Ivanov to
meditate on the greatness of Shakespeare. Pryanchikov had hurried off to page
through a borrowed issue of last year’s Ogonyok; Nerzhin had left to see
Spiridon the yardman; Potapov, carrying out his housewifely duties in full, had
washed the pots, put back the lockers where they belonged, and was now lying
with a pillow over his head to shut out light and noise. Many of those in the
room were asleep already, others quietly reading or talking, and the hour had
come when you begin to wonder whether the duty officer has forgotten to
switch the main lights off and the blue light on. And Sologdin and Rubin were
still sitting on Pryanchikov’s empty bed, hidden by the remaining locker.
Only Sologdin really felt like arguing. The day had been a day of victories
for him, and they had left him seething with excitement. In any case, Sunday
evening, in his timetable, was always set aside for entertainment. And what
better fun could there possibly be than shaming and confounding this champion
of the prevailing cretinism?
On this occasion Rubin found their debate irksome and absurd. He had
unfinished work on his hands, and on top of that a new, extremely difficult task
had devolved upon him, the creation of a whole new science! He had to make a
start single-handedly early next morning, and he should really be conserving
his strength. And then there were two letters demanding his attention, one from
his wife and one from his mistress. There would never be a better time to
answer them, giving his wife important advice on bringing up the children, and
his mistress tender reassurances. Other things, too, had claims on him—the
Mongolian-Finnish, Spanish-Arabic, and other dictionaries, ˇCapek,
Hemingway, Lawrence. . . . And on top of all that—something he hadn’t been
able to get around to all evening, what with the mock trial, the teasing remarks
from his neighbors, and the birthday ritual—the finalization of a major project
of great public importance.
But the prison’s debating rules had him in their grip. Rubin must never let
himself be defeated in argument, because in the sharashka he represented the
ideology of progress. So he was forced to sit there with Sologdin, as though
tied hand and foot, trying to ram into him rudimentary ideas that ought to be
within the grasp of children in nursery school.
Sologdin was now quietly and gently laying down the law.
“I can tell you from my experience in the camps that a proper debate must be
conducted like a duel. We agree on an umpire; we can call on Gleb, for
instance. We take a sheet of paper and draw a vertical line down the middle.
Across the top of the page, we write the subject of the discussion. Then each of
us, on his own half, expresses as clearly and succinctly as possible his views
on the question. To prevent thoughtless slips in the choice of words, there is no
time limit.”
“You must take me for a fool,” Rubin said sleepily, his puckered eyelids half
closed. His bearded face looked infinitely weary. “Are we supposed to go on
arguing all night?”
“Certainly not,” Sologdin said, eyes twinkling merrily. “That’s the marvelous
thing about a proper man-to-man argument. Some people can go on idly
bandying words and disturbing the air to no purpose for weeks on end. But an
argument on paper can be over in ten minutes; it is immediately obvious if the
opponents are talking about completely different things or if there is no real
disagreement between them. When there is a clear case for continuing, the two
sides start writing their views down alternately, each on his own half of the
paper. Just like a duel—parry and thrust, or shot for shot. And just think—
evasiveness and substituting different words for what was said before are
impossible, and the result is that after two or three exchanges one side emerges
clearly victorious and the other a clear loser.”
“And there’s no time limit?”
“To ensure that truth prevails? Certainly not.”
“And do we then go on to fight with broadswords?”
Sologdin’s flushed face darkened.
“I knew it! You pitch into me—”
“No, you started it. . . .”
“Call me all sorts of names—you’ve got bags of them. Caveman, backslider”
(avoiding the “incomprehensible” foreign word “reactionary”), “king of
lickspittles” (his rendering of “certified lackey”). You have a larger stock of
insults than of scientific terms. And when I stand up to you and propose an
honest debate, you have neither time nor appetite for it; you’re too tired. Yet
you found both the time and the will to rip the guts out of our whole country!”
“Out of half the world!” Rubin politely corrected him. “We always have time
and strength for action. But for pointless jawing? What have you and I got to
talk about? We’ve said all we have to say to each other.”
“What have we got to talk about? I leave it to you to choose,” Sologdin said
with a gallant gesture. “Choose your weapons! Name the place!”
“Right, then. My choice of subject is . . . nothing!”
“That’s against the rules!”
“What rules? Where do you get all these rules from? What sort of inquisition
is this? Why can’t you understand that fruitful argument is impossible without
some sort of common ground; there obviously has to be some sort of agreement
on fundamentals.”
“There you go! Just as I said! You want us both to accept the theory of added
value and workers’ rule”—the term for “dictatorship of the proletariat” in the
Language of Utter Clarity. “And there’d be nothing left to argue about except
whether certain flourishes were added by Marx on an empty stomach or Engels
after a good dinner.”
There was no escape from this scoffer! Rubin boiled over.
“Why, oh why, can’t you see that this is just stupid! You and I have nothing to
say to each other! However you look at it, we are from different planets. You
still think, for instance, that the duel is the best way to seek redress for a
grievance!”
“Disprove it if you can!”
Sologdin leaned back, beaming.
“If we had duels, who would dare slander another person? Who would dare
jostle weaker people?”
“Why, those swaggering blades of yours would! Your knights erroneous! The
darkness of the Middle Ages, those stupid, arrogant knights, the crusades—all
that is the high point of history as far as you are concerned!”
Sologdin sat to attention and brandished one finger over his head.
“Yes, the highest point in the history of the human spirit!”
“And all those great cargoes of crusaders’ loot? What a sickening hidalgo
you are!”
“And you’re an Old Testament fanatic! A man possessed!” Sologdin retorted.
“I suppose you regard Belinsky, say, and Chernyshevsky and all our greatest
educators as half-educated sons of village priests?”
“Long-skirted seminarians!” Sologdin added joyfully.
“And I suppose you regard Revolution—let’s leave ours out of it—the
French Revolution, say, a century and a half after the event, as the work of a
mindless mob in thrall to its diabolical instincts—and the destruction of a
nation? Am I right?”
“Yes, of course! Just try proving the opposite. The greatness of France ends
with the eighteenth century. What came after the revolt? A handful of great men,
yes, but in the wrong place and at the wrong time. A nation in terminal decline!
Continual changes of regime have made France the laughingstock of the world.
France is impotent! Will-less! Null! A handful of dust!”
Sologdin burst into demonic laughter.
“Savage! Troglodyte!” Rubin said indignantly.
“And France will never get on its feet again! Unless it’s with the help of the
Church of Rome!”
“That’s another thing! The Reformation, to you, means not the inevitable
liberation of the human mind from ecclesiastical shackles but—”
“But madness and blindness! Lutheran devil worship! The disruption of
Europe! The self-destruction of the European peoples! Worse than the two
world wars!”
“There you are, then! You’re a fossil! An ichthyosaurus! What is there for us
to discuss? Look what a tangle you’ve got yourself into! Let’s just part
friends.”
Sologdin saw that Rubin was about to get up and go away. That simply
couldn’t be allowed! His bit of fun was walking out on him! Before it had even
got started. He reined himself in and became unrecognizably mild.
“Forgive me, Lev, my friend, I got carried away. It’s late, of course, and I
don’t insist on our tackling one of the major questions. Let’s just try out the
‘duel’ procedure on some neat little topic. I’ll give you some headings”—
meaning “themes”—“to choose from. Would you like something literary?
That’s your field, not mine.”
“Give it a rest, can’t you.”
This was his chance to leave without damage to his reputation. Rubin started
getting up, but Sologdin hurriedly forestalled him.
“All right. A moral heading: the role of pride in the life of a human being.”
Rubin yawned with boredom.
“What are we, schoolgirls?”
He rose and stood between the beds.
“What about this one, then?” Sologdin said, seizing his hand.
“Get lost.” Rubin waved him away, laughing. “Everything’s topsy-turvy in
that head of yours. You’re the one man on the face of the earth who still doesn’t
recognize the three laws of the dialectic. From which all else follows!”
Sologdin’s pink palm dismissed this charge.
“What d’you mean, don’t recognize? I do in fact recognize them.”
“Wha-at? You’ve recognized the dialectic?” Rubin spluttered, lips
protruding. “Darling boy! Let me give you a kiss! Have you really, though?”
“I haven’t just recognized the dialectic; I’ve thought about it. Every morning
for two months! Which is more than you’ve done!”
“Even thought about it, have you? You’re getting more intelligent every day!
But in that case what is there for us to argue about?”
“What d’you mean?” Sologdin was indignant. “First there’s no common
ground, so there’s nothing to argue about; then when there is common ground,
there’s nothing to argue about! That won’t do! Kindly get on with it!”
“Why are you such a bully? What is it you want to argue about?
Sologdin was also on his feet now and waving his arms.
“All right, then! I’m ready to fight on the most unfavorable conditions. I will
defeat you with a weapon wrested from your own dirty paws! What we will
discuss is whether you yourself really understand your three laws! You people
are like cannibals dancing around a fire without the least idea what fire is. I
can trip you up on those laws as often as I like.”
“Go ahead, then!”
Rubin could not help raising his voice. He was annoyed with himself but
bogged down again.
“All right.” Sologdin sat down. “Take a seat.”
Rubin stayed on his feet.
“Now, where’s the best place to begin?” Sologdin mentally savored some
possibilities. “These laws now—they show us the direction of development,
am I right?”
“Direction?”
“Yes. Which way a . . . a . . . process”—the word stuck in his throat—“is
going.”
“Of course.”
“And where do you see that happening? Where, precisely?” Sologdin asked
coldly.
“In the laws themselves. They exemplify movement.”
Rubin sat down himself. They began talking in a quiet, matter-of-fact way.
“Which law precisely tells us the direction of that movement?”
“Not the first, obviously. . . . The second. Or maybe the third.”
“Hm. The third, you say. And how do we determine it?”
“Determine what?”
“The direction of movement, what else?”
Rubin frowned. “Listen, what exactly is the point of all this scholasticism?”
“You call this scholasticism? That shows how unfamiliar you are with the
exact sciences. If a law gives us no numerical coordinates and we don’t know
the direction of development either, we don’t know a damn thing. Right. Look
at it from another angle. You frequently and glibly trot out the term ‘negation of
the negation.’ But what do you understand by those words? Can you, for
instance, answer this question: Does negation of the negation always take place
in the course of development, or doesn’t it?”
Rubin thought for a moment. An unexpected question. Not usually put that
way. But never let the other man see that you’re stuck for an answer!
“Generally speaking,” he said. “As a rule.”
“There you go!” Sologdin roared triumphantly. “All those cant words!
You’ve devised thousands of these little phrases—‘generally speaking,’ ‘as a
rule,’ and so on—to avoid straight talk. Somebody says ‘negation of the
negation’ and your brain prints out, ‘single grain, produces stalk, stalk
produces ten grains.’ It sets my teeth on edge! It makes me sick! Give me a
straight answer: When does negation of the negation occur, and when does it
not occur? When should we expect it, and when is it impossible?”
All trace of Rubin’s apathy had disappeared. He collected his wandering
thoughts and concentrated on this uncalled-for but nonetheless important
debate.
“When does it occur, and when doesn’t it—what practical difference does
that make?”
“I like that! This is one of the three laws by which you explain absolutely
everything, and you ask whether it has any practical importance. It’s pointless
talking to you!”
“You’re putting the cart before the horse,” Rubin said indignantly.
“More verbiage! More claptrap!”
“Cart before horse,” Rubin insisted. “We Marxists would be ashamed to
proceed from the laws of the dialectic themselves to concrete analysis of
phenomena. So we have no need whatsoever to know ‘when it occurs’ and
‘when it doesn’t.’ ”
“Well, let me give you the answer! Only, you’ll say right away that you knew
it all along, that it’s obvious, that it goes without saying. . . . Listen, though; if it
is possible to reverse a process so that a thing is restored to its previous
condition, negation of the negation has not taken place. Suppose, for instance, a
nut is tightened to the limit, and you want to loosen it; you just turn it the
opposite way. There we have a process in reverse, a transition from
quantitative to qualitative change, but no ‘negation of the negation’! But if the
former qualitative state cannot be reproduced by movement in the reverse
direction, then development may proceed through negation, but even so only if
repetitions are allowed. In other words, irreversible changes will be negations
only where the negation of the negations themselves is possible.”
“Ivan is a man, so what is not Ivan is not a man,” muttered Rubin. “You’re
like somebody on parallel bars.”
“Back to our example. If while tightening the nut, you were to break the
thread, then unscrewing it will not restore its previous quality, its unbroken
thread. You can only reproduce that quality now by melting down the nut,
rolling a hexagonal bar, shaping it on a lathe, and finally cutting a new nut.”
“Wait a bit, Mitya,” Rubin said mildly. “You can’t seriously use the
tightening and loosening of a nut to exemplify the laws of the dialectic.”
“Why not? Why shouldn’t a nut do as well as a grain of corn? No machine
can hold together without nuts. Well, then, each of the states I’ve enumerated is
irreversible; it negates the previous state, but the new nut in relation to the old,
damaged one is the negation of the negation. Simple, eh?” Pointing his neatly
trimmed goatee at Rubin.
“Wait a bit! What makes you think you’ve beaten me? It follows from what
you’ve said yourself that the third law gives us the direction of development.”
Sologdin bowed, hand on heart.
“If you weren’t such a quick thinker, my dear Lev, I would hardly do myself
the honor of talking to you. You’re right; the third does just that. But we must
learn how to take what the law gives us. Do you know how? How to use the
law, instead of worshipping it? You have deduced that it tells us the direction
of development. To which we say, does it always do so? In the physical
world? In animate nature as well? In society? Well?”
“Hm, well,” Rubin said thoughtfully, “maybe there’s a rational kernel in all
this. But most of what you say, my dear fellow, is mere twaddle.”
Sologdin flared up again and cut him short with a gesture.
“You are the twaddlers!”
He could have been brandishing a sword, hemmed in by Saracens. “You
don’t understand a single one of your laws, although you deduce everything
from them.”
“I keep telling you, we do not.”
“Don’t deduce everything from them?”
Sologdin was so astonished that his sword arm froze.
“No, we don’t.”
“So they’re just a tail to pin on the donkey? In that case, how did you decide
in which direction society was going to develop?”
“Listen, can’t you!” Rubin intoned his answer for extra emphasis. “What are
you, a block of oak or a human being? We resolve all questions by concrete
analysis of the material facts. Got it? All questions having to do with society
are answered by analysis of the class situation.”
“So why the dialectic?” Sologdin roared, heedless of the silence around
them. “The three laws aren’t really needed at all.”
“Oh, yes they are. Very much so.”
“What for? If nothing can be deduced from them? If you don’t need them to
find out the direction of change—why all that twaddle? If all you can do is
keep parroting negation of the negation, why in hell’s name do you need them at
all?”
Potapov, who had been trying in vain to shelter himself from the growing
storm, angrily whipped the pillow from his ear and raised himself on one
elbow.
“Listen, friends!” he said. “If you can’t sleep yourself, show some respect
for those who can”—pointing obliquely upward at Ruska’s bunk—“or find a
more suitable place.”
The wrath of Potapov, that lover of order and moderation, the hush which
had settled on the whole semicircular room, and their awareness that they were
surrounded by stool pigeons (though Rubin of course could fearlessly shout his
beliefs on this subject) would have brought any sober person to his senses.
But these two sobered up only slightly. Their long dispute, the latest of many,
was just beginning. They realized that they had to leave the room, but they
were incapable by now of lowering their voices or of relaxing their grip on
each other. They were still bandying insults as the door to the hallway closed
behind them.
The white light went out almost as they left, and the blue nightlight was
turned on.
Ruska Doronin’s wakeful ear had been closer than any other to the debate,
but no one could have been less interested in collecting “material” for use
against them. He had heard Potapov’s hint and understood it, without seeing the
finger aimed at himself. He felt the helpless resentment we all experience
when we are reproached by those whose opinions matter to us.
When he began his dangerous double game with the operations officers, he
had allowed for everything, he had cheated the vigilance of his enemies, and
now he was on the verge of a spectacular triumph with the “147 rubles” affair.
But he had no protection against the suspicions of his friends. His solitary
scheme, simply because it was so out of the ordinary and so secret, had earned
him disgrace and contempt. It surprised him that these mature, sensible,
experienced people lacked the generosity of mind to understand him and
believe that he was not a traitor.
Whenever we lose the sympathy of others, the one who goes on loving us
becomes triply dear.
And if that one is a woman. . . .
Klara! She would understand! He would tell her all about this risky scheme
tomorrow, and she would understand.
With no hope of going to sleep, or indeed any wish to, he tossed and turned
in his sweaty bed, remembering Klara’s questioning eyes, searching for the
flaws in his plan to escape under the wire and along the gulley to the high road,
where he would just take a bus straight to the city center.
Once he was there, Klara would help him.
He would be harder to find in a city of seven million people than in the bare
expanses of Vorkuta. Moscow was the place for an escape!