Chapter-14-The-Blue-Light

“I WILL THROW a shoe at that blue bulb one of these days. It gets on my
nerves.”
“You’ll miss.”
“At five meters? Couldn’t if I tried. Bet you tomorrow’s compote?”
“You take your shoes off on the bottom bunk. Add another meter.”
“Six meters, then. The things those swine think up just to aggravate the zeks. I
can feel it pressing on my eyeballs all night long.”
“What, the blue light?”
“Blue or not blue, light exerts pressure. Lebedev proved that. Aristipp
Ivanych, you asleep? Do me a favor, hand up one of my shoes.”
“I can pass you a shoe, Vyacheslav Petrovich, but tell me first what you’ve
got against the blue light.”
“For one thing it has a short wavelength and so more quanta. The quanta hit
me in the eye.”
“It sheds a gentle light and reminds me personally of the blue nightlight my
mother used to put on for me when I was little.”
“Mama’s got blue shoulder boards now! But let me ask you, can people ever
be trusted with real democracy? In every cell I’ve been in, whenever a
problem arises, if it’s only about washing the mess tins or sweeping the floor,
every imaginable shade of opinion is expressed. Freedom would be the ruin of
human beings. Only the big stick, alas, can teach us the truth.”
“D’you know what ? An icon lamp would be just right here. After all, that
used to be an altar.”
“Not an altar, the baldachin over the altar. They’ve built over the altar.”
“Dmitri Aleksandrych! What are you doing? Opening windows in December!
Give us a break!”
“Gentlemen! It’s oxygen that makes the zek immortal! In this room there are
twenty-four people, and outside it’s neither freezing nor blowing. See this
book? It’s an Ehrenburg. I’ll open the window just one Ehrenburg.”
“Make it one and a half! It’s suffocating on these top bunks.”
“When you say one Ehrenburg, do you mean sideways?”
“No, lengthwise. It fits the frame beautifully.”
“It’s enough to drive anybody crazy. Where’s my camp overcoat?”
“I’d send all these oxygen fiends to Oy-Myakon. After twelve hours’ hard
labor at sixty below, they’d crawl into a goat pen as long as it was warm.”
“I have nothing against oxygen in principle, but why does it always have to
be cold? I’m all for warmed-up oxygen.”
“Why the devil is it always so dark in this room? Why do they switch the
white light off so early?”
“Valentulya, you’re a twit! If you had your way, you’d be wandering around
till one o’clock. Who needs light at midnight?”
“And you’re a fop!
“In a cobalt jumpsuit
Above me’s a fop.
In the cozy camp zone
Everything’s so good.”
“Who’s smoking again? Why do you all smoke? Filthy habit. . . . Damn, the
teapot’s cold as well.”
“Val, where’s Lev?”
“Isn’t he on his bunk?”
“I can see a couple of dozen books, but no Lev.”
“So he’ll be by the bathroom.”
“Why by?”
“They’ve screwed a white bulb in, and the wall is warm from the kitchen. I
dare say he’s there reading. I’m just going for a wash. Any messages?”
“. . . Yes, well, she puts some bedclothes on the floor for me, and lies on the
bed herself. She was a juicy piece, I can tell you. Really juicy!”
“Friends, I beg you, talk about something else, anything except women. With
all the meat we eat in the sharashka, that’s antisocial talk.”
“Now then, all you heroes! Leave it off! Lights out has sounded!”
“Never mind lights out, I think I hear the national anthem somewhere.”
“I dare say you’ll sleep when you’re ready.”
“Where’s their sense of humor? They’ve been blaring out that anthem for five
solid minutes. It’s gut-wrenching! When will it ever end? Why on earth
couldn’t they make do with one verse?”
“One verse and the call sign, for a country like Russia?”
“. . . I fought in Africa. Under Rommel. What was bad about that? Well, it
was very hot, and there was no water.”
“There’s an island in the Arctic Ocean, Makhotkin Island. It’s named after the
polar aviator Makhotkin, who is now doing a stretch for anti-Soviet agitation.”
“Mikhail Kuzmich, why do you keep tossing and turning?”
“Can’t I turn over if I want to?”
“Of course you can, but just remember that every little turn down below is
enormously amplified when it reaches me up here.”
“You’ve managed to miss the camps so far, Ivan Ivanych. They sleep four to
a bunk there. When one man turns over, the other three are seasick. Sometimes
a man down below rigs up a curtain and brings a woman in, and you get a
magnitude-twelve earthquake! People still manage to sleep.”
“Grigory Borisych, when did you first land in a sharashka?”
“I’m thinking of putting in a pentode and a little rheostat there.”
“He was a man who knew how to look after himself, a methodical man.
When he kicked his shoes off at night, he wouldn’t leave them on the floor;
he’d put them under the pillow.”
“You couldn’t leave anything on the floor in those days!”
“I was in Auschwitz. The terrible thing there was that they marched people
straight from the train to the gas chambers with a band playing.”
“The fishing there is marvelous, and so is the hunting. Go out for an hour in
the autumn, and you can come back adorned with pheasants. Step into the reed
beds, and you’ve got boar. Walk out onto the plain, and you’ve got rabbits.”
“All these sharashkas date from 1930, when they started rounding up
engineers in droves. The first was on Furkasov. That’s where they planned the
White Sea Canal. Then there was the Ramzin outfit. The experiment caught on.
Outside, you can never get two great engineers or two great scientists to work
together on the same project. They’re rivals for fame, for a Stalin Prize, and
sooner or later one of them will squeeze out the other. That’s why outside
every project planning team is a pale penumbra around one brilliant head. But
what happens in a sharashka? Nobody needs to worry about fame or money. If
Nikolai Nikolaich gets half a glass of sour cream, Pyotr Petrovich gets the
other half. A dozen bears can live amicably in the same den because there’s
nowhere else for them to go. They play a little chess, smoke a few cigarettes,
and when they get bored, somebody says, ‘I know, let’s invent something!’
‘Good idea!’ Many of our scientific advances were made that way. And that’s
the whole point of the sharashkas.”
“I’ve got news for you, boys! Bobynin’s been driven off somewhere!”
“What d’you mean, driven off?”
“The junior lieutenant came and said, ‘Get your hat and coat on.’ ”
“Did he have to take his gear?”
“No gear.”
“One of the top brass must have sent for him.”
“Foma, maybe?”
“Foma would have come here. Aim a bit higher!”
“The tea’s gone cold. It’s a dog’s life!”
“Val, boy, you’re always rattling that spoon in your glass after lights out! I’m
sick and tired of it!”
“So how am I supposed to stir my tea?”
“Noiselessly.”
“Nothing happens noiselessly. Except cosmic catastrophes, because sound
doesn’t travel in outer space. If a nova exploded right behind us, we wouldn’t
hear it. Ruska, your blanket’s falling off. Why don’t you tuck it in? You asleep?
Do you realize that our sun is a nova and that the earth is doomed to destruction
in the very near future?”
“I refuse to believe it. I’m still young, and I want to live!”
“Ha-ha! How primitive! . . . Such cold tea! C’est le mot! . . . Wants to live!”
“Val, boy, where’ve they taken Bobynin?
“How should I know? To see Stalin, maybe.”
“What would you do if Stalin sent for you, Val?”
“Me? Boy, oh boy! I would present him with a full list of complaints.”
“Such as?”
“I’ve told you—every single one. Par exemple, why do we have to do
without women? It cramps our creative potential.”
“Pryanchik! Put a sock in it! Everybody’s fast asleep. Why are you shouting
your head off?”
“What if I don’t want to sleep?”
“Anybody smoking? Keep it out of sight. The junior lieutenant’s coming.”
“What’s the bastard want now? . . . Mind you, don’t trip, Citizen Junior
Lieutenant; you might get a bloody nose!”
“Pryanchikov!”
“Eh?”
“Where are you? Not asleep yet?”
“Yes, I’m asleep.”
“Get dressed quickly.”
“What for? I want my sleep.”
“I said get dressed. Get your hat and coat on.”
“What about my things?”
“Never mind your things. Transport’s waiting. Hurry up.”
“Am I going with Bobynin?”
“Bobynin’s gone already. Another one’s come for you.”
“Another what, lieutenant? Meat wagon?”
“Come on, hurry up. No, it’s a Pobeda.”
“Who’s sent for me?”
“Come on, Pryanchikov. That’s enough questions. I don’t know the answer
myself. Get a move on.”
“Give them an earful, Val!”
“Tell them about visits!”
“Shouldn’t Section 58 prisoners get one visit a year?”
“Tell them about exercise periods.”
“And letters!”
“And our uniforms!”
“Workers of the world, unite! Ha-ha! Adieu!”
“. . . Comrade Junior Lieutenant, where on earth is Pryanchikov?”
“I’m bringing him, Comrade Major! Here he is!”
“Sock it to them, Val boy. Every bit of it! Don’t be shy!”
“The filth are mighty busy in the middle of the night!”
“Wonder what’s happened?”
“Never saw anything like this before!”
“Maybe war’s broken out? Maybe they’re taking them to be shot?”
“Idiot! D’you think they’d take us one at a time? When war comes, they’ll
mow us down wholesale. Or put something in the mush to infect us with
plague, like the Germans did in concentration camps in ’45.”
“Leave it now, let’s get some sleep. We’ll hear all about it in the morning.”
“I remember Beria sending for Boris Sergeevich Stechkin in 1939–40. He
never came back to the sharashka empty-handed. Either the prison governor
would be replaced, or exercise periods would be prolonged. . . . Stechkin
couldn’t stand the differential rationing system: Academicians were bribed
with cream and eggs, professors got forty grams of the best butter, and ordinary
workhorses only twenty. . . . A good man, Boris Sergeevich, God rest him.”
“Is he dead, then?”
“No. He was released. He got a Stalin Prize.”