Chapter-47-Top-Secret-Conversation

THE BELL FOR THE DINNER BREAK could be heard in every nook and cranny of
the ex-seminary, and its ringing reached even Kondrashov’s remote landing.
Nerzhin hurried out into the open.
The exercise yard was not spacious, but Nerzhin liked to make a path of his
own, away from the others. As in his cell, it was three paces forward, three
paces back, but if he was alone that was enough. In this way he derived from
the exercise period a few blissful moments of solitude and readjustment.
Hiding his civilian suit under the long tails of his indestructible artillery
overcoat (not taking your suit off in time was a serious breach of discipline,
and he could be turned away from the exercise area, but it would be a pity to
waste walking time by going to change), Nerzhin took brisk steps to get there
and occupy the short path he had beaten between one lime tree and the next, on
the very edge of the permitted zone, near the fence beyond which stood the
bishop’s shiplike house.
He did not want to dissipate his thoughts in idle conversation.
Snowflakes fluttered, so sparse and weightless that it could hardly be said to
be snowing, though they did not melt on the ground. Nerzhin began walking,
head in the air, looking up at the sky, not where he was going. His body was
invigorated by deep drafts of air, and his soul fused with the peace of the sky,
overcast and snow-laden though it was.
But somebody called his name. He looked around. Another shabby officer’s
overcoat and a winter cap (he, too, had been arrested at the front in winter):
Rubin, half concealed by the trunk of a lime. Rubin felt embarrassed, felt that
he was treating his friend and messmate badly; Nerzhin would be prolonging,
in his own mind, the meeting with his wife, and Rubin had to interrupt him at
that sacred moment. He showed his embarrassment by extending no more than
half of his beard from behind the tree.
“Gleb, old friend! If I’m barging in at the wrong moment, just tell me and I’ll
disappear. But I do very much want a word with you.”
Nerzhin looked at Rubin’s gently imploring eyes, at the white branches of the
lime trees, and at Rubin again. However long he went on pacing that lonely
path, he could enjoy no more the mingled joy and sorrow in his heart. It was
already cooling.
Life went on.
“That’s okay, Lev. What is it?”
Rubin emerged and joined him on his path. Gleb gathered from his solemn
unsmiling look that something important had happened. It would have been
impossible to tempt Rubin more sorely than by burdening him with an
earthshaking secret and forbidding him to share it with any of his closest
friends! If the American imperialists kidnapped him from the sharashka that
moment and started chopping him into little pieces, he would never reveal his
top-secret assignment! But to be the only zek in the sharashka in possession of
such a tremendous secret and not tell even Nerzhin, that called for a
superhuman effort!
Telling Gleb was the same as telling no one. He would not pass it on.
Anyway, it was only natural to confide in him, since he alone was au courant
with the classification of voices and could understand how difficult and how
important the task was. Besides, it was a matter of urgency to reach an
understanding with him while there was time. Later on, there would be a
frantic hurry; there would be no tearing yourself away from the tapes, things
would become more and more complicated. . . . Lev had to have an assistant.
In short, ordinary professional prudence fully justified what might look like
betrayal of a state secret.
Two shabby military caps and two threadbare overcoats . . . shoulders
touching, feet muddying and widening the path, they slowly paced, side by
side.
“My old friend! This conversation never took place—never, never! Even in
the Council of Ministers, no more than a couple of people know what I’m
going to tell you.”
“I’m as silent as the grave, anyway. But if it’s so desperately secret, maybe
you shouldn’t tell me. What you don’t know can’t keep you awake.”
“Don’t be silly! I wouldn’t tell you if I didn’t have to. They’ll have my head
if they find out. But I’m going to need your help.”
“Spit it out, then.”
Watching carefully to make sure that no one came too close to them, Rubin
quietly explained about the recorded telephone call and the purpose of the
work he had been asked to do.
Though Nerzhin had lost his natural curiosity since he had been in prison, he
listened with intense interest and stopped in his tracks once or twice to ask
questions.
“You see, old fellow,” Rubin said in conclusion, “it’s a new science, the
science of phonoscopy, with its own methods and its own horizons. To embark
on it alone would be both difficult and boring for me. How great it will be if
we both put our shoulders to the wheel! To be the founders of a completely
new science—there’s something to be proud of!”
“And that’s what he calls science!” Nerzhin muttered. “As far as I’m
concerned, it stinks!”
“All right, Archesilaus of Antioch wouldn’t have approved! But don’t you
want an early release? If we succeed, you’ll get a hefty remission and a clean
passport. And even if we don’t, you’ll make your position in the sharashka
more secure; you’ll become an indispensable expert! People like Anton won’t
dare lay a finger on you.”
One of the limes bordering the path forked at chest height. This time, instead
of turning around when he reached it, Nerzhin leaned back against it and rested
his head in the fork. With his cap pulled down low on his forehead, he could
almost have been one of the professional crooks, and the look he gave Rubin
was in character.
This was the second time in twenty-four hours he had been offered a chance
of salvation. And for the second time it gave him no joy.
“Listen, Lev. . . . All these atom bombs and rockets, and your newly hatched
phonoscopy”—he spoke haltingly, as though he wasn’t sure how to answer
—“it’s the jaws of the dragon. People who know too much have been walled
up in dungeons since the dawn of time. If only two members of the Council of
Ministers—obviously Stalin and Beria—know about phonoscopy, plus two
idiots like you and me, we will get our remission via the muzzle of a gun at the
back of the head. I wonder, incidentally, why the Cheka-MGB makes a point of
shooting people in the back of the head. A low trick, I call it. I’d sooner take a
volley in the chest, with my eyes open! They’re afraid to look their victims in
the eye, that’s what it is! And with so much work to be done, they want to spare
the executioners too much nervous strain!”
Rubin was at a loss for words. Nerzhin, too, fell silent, still lolling against
the tree. You would have said that they had discussed everything under the sun,
from every imaginable angle, that there were no surprises left for them, but the
two pairs of eyes, the dark brown and the dark blue, looked questioningly into
each other.
Rubin sighed. “But a telephone call like that is a crucial moment in world
history. We have no moral right to ignore it.”
Nerzhin roused himself. “So why don’t you come straight out with it? Why
all this flimflam stuff about new sciences and remission of sentences? Your
object is to catch the rascal, I take it?”
Rubin’s eyes narrowed and his features hardened.
“Yes! That’s what I want! This rotten little Moscow fancy pants, this
wretched little careerist, is obstructing the road to socialism and must be
removed.”
“What makes you think he’s a fancy pants and a careerist?”
“I’ve heard his voice. And because he’s so eager to curry favor with his
foreign bosses.”
”Aren’t you just salving your conscience?”
“What do you mean?”
“He’s evidently fairly high up in the service, so wouldn’t it be simpler for
him just to curry favor with Vyshinsky? It seems a funny way to curry favor—
with people in another country, without even telling them your name.”
“He’s probably counting on turning up there. To go up the ladder, he’d have
to keep on performing his boring old duties irreproachably, to earn some little
decoration in twenty years’ time, an extra palm leaf on his sleeve, or whatever.
But in the West he could cause a world sensation and pocket a million!”
“Mmm, . . . well. . . . All the same, basing your judgment of somebody’s
motives on the sound of a voice in the 300- to 2400-hertz waveband. . . . What
do you think—was he telling the truth?”
“You mean about the radio shop?”
“Yes.”
“Up to a point he obviously was.”
“You mean there’s a rational kernel in it?” Nerzhin said, teasing him. “Oy,
oy, oy, Levka! So now you’re standing up for thieves?”
“They aren’t thieves; they’re intelligence agents.”
“What’s the difference? Another lot of fancy pants and careerists, in New
York this time, may steal the secret of the atom bomb to line their pockets with
three million rubles from the East! Only maybe you haven’t heard their
voices?”
“Idiot! The fumes from the night bucket have gone to your head! Prison has
made you see everything in a false perspective! How can you compare people
who are out to wreck socialism with those who serve it?”
Rubin’s face expressed suffering.
Nerzhin shoved his cap farther back—he was feeling hot—and rested his
head in the fork of the tree again.
“Listen, whose marvelous lines were those I heard a little while ago, about
the two Alyoshas?”
“Things were different then, before I’d learned to discriminate, before my
ideals were clearly defined. In those days . . . it was still possible. . . .”
“And now you see your ideal clearly in the shape of the Gulag?”
“No! In the shape of the ethical ideals of socialism! Capitalism has none, just
greed for profit!”
“Listen!” By now Nerzhin was wedging his shoulders into the fork of the
tree, preparing himself for a long discussion. “Could you kindly explain these
socialist ideals you talk about? They’re nowhere to be seen at present. All
right, maybe somebody’s botched the experiment, but when and where can we
expect to see them; what do they amount to? Eh? Socialism, of whatever
variety, is a sort of caricature of the Gospel message. Socialism promises only
equality and a full belly, and that only by means of coercion.”
“Isn’t that enough? Has any society in history ever had as much?”
“You’ll find equality and full bellies in any good pigsty! What a tremendous
favor they’ve bestowed on us! Equality and plenty! Give us a moral society!”
“We will! Just don’t make difficulties! Don’t get in the way!”
“Don’t make bomb stealing difficult?”
“What twisted minds some people have! How is it that all intelligent and
straight-thinking people. . . .”
Nerzhin laughed. “Who? Yakov Ivanovich Mamurin? Grigory Borisovich
Abramson?”
“All the really enlightened minds! All the greatest thinkers in the West!
Sartre, for instance! They all support socialism! They’re all against capitalism!
That’s almost a platitude by now! You’re the only one who can’t see it!
Pithecanthropus erectus!”
Rubin loomed dangerously over Nerzhin and shook him with grappling
fingers. Nerzhin planted his palms on Rubin’s chest to push him away.
“Have it your way! Maybe I am an ape! But I refuse to use your terminology.
I refuse to talk about what you call capitalism and socialism! I don’t
understand these words, and I won’t use them!”
Rubin laughed and relaxed a little. “I suppose you prefer the Language of
Utter Clarity?”
“Yes, if you like!”
“What do you understand?”
“I understand words like ‘a family of one’s own,’ ‘inviolability of the
person.’ ”
“ ‘Unlimited freedom,’ perhaps?”
“No—moral self-limitation.”
“Fetal philosopher! How far will you get with amorphous, protozoic
concepts like that in the twentieth century? Those are all class-conditioned
ideas! Dependent on—”
“Are they, hell!” Nerzhin freed himself and stood up out of his niche. “Justice
is never relative. . . .”
“It’s a class concept! Of course it is,” said Rubin, brandishing an open hand
over Nerzhin’s head.
“Justice is the cornerstone, the foundation of the universe!” Nerzhin, too,
waved an arm. Anyone watching from a distance might have thought that they
were about to start fighting. “We were born with a sense of justice in our souls;
we can’t and don’t want to live without it! Remember what Fyodor Ioanich
says: ‘I am not strong, I am easily deceived, but I can distinguish white from
black. Give me your keys, Godunov!’ ”
“You’ve got nowhere to hide!” Rubin said threateningly. “You’ll have to
declare someday which side of the barricade you’re on.”
Nerzhin answered just as angrily. “That’s another word you blasted fanatics
have done to death! You’ve put up barricades all over the world! That’s the
horror of it! A man may want to be a citizen of the world, a little lower than the
angels, but they grab him by the legs and pull him down! ‘Whoever is not with
us is against us!’Just leave me room to move in! Room to move in, I tell you!”
Nerzhin pushed him away.
“We would leave you room—it’s those on the other side who won’t.”
“You would, you say? When did you ever let anybody move freely? It’s tanks
and fixed bayonets every inch of the way. . . .”
“Look, my friend,” said Rubin more gently, “look at it in historical
perspective.”
“To hell with your perspective! I want to live now, not ‘in the long term’! I
know what you’re going to say! It’s just a matter of bureaucratic distortions;
this is a transitional period, a temporary state of affairs—but this transitional
order of yours makes my life impossible; it tramples my soul underfoot; that’s
what your transitional system does, and I won’t defend it, not being an
imbecile!”
“I made a mistake disturbing you after your visit,” Rubin said quite gently.
“Seeing my wife has nothing at all to do with it!” Nerzhin spoke as bitterly as
ever. “I think just the same at any other time! We ridicule the Christians—silly
so-and-sos, living in hopes of paradise and putting up with absolutely
everything on this earth! But what have we got to look forward to? For whose
sake do we suffer? For our mythical descendants? What difference does it
make whether it’s happiness for posterity or happiness in the next world? We
can’t see either.”
“You never were a Marxist!”
“Alas, I was.”
“You dog! You scoundrel! We learned how to classify voices together. What
am I supposed to do now? Work by myself?”
“You’ll find somebody.”
“Who?” Rubin pouted. Incongruously, the expression on his bold, piratical
features was that of a hurt child.
“No, pal. It’s no good your taking offense. They drench me from head to foot
with a certain yellowy brown liquid, and I’m supposed to get the atom bomb
for them? No thanks!”
“For us, you idiot, not for them!”
“What do you mean, for us? Do you need the atom bomb? I don’t. I’m like
Zemelya; I have no ambition to rule the world.”
Rubin thought of something else. “Joking apart, would you really let that little
pimple make a present of the bomb to the West?”
“You’re a bit mixed up, dear Lev.” He touched the lapel of Rubin’s overcoat
affectionately. “The bomb is there, in the West. They invented it, and you’re
trying to steal it.”
“They’re the ones who’ve dropped it!” Rubin’s brown eyes flashed. “And
you’re prepared to put up with that? You can connive at what the little pimple
has done?”
Nerzhin answered in the same thoughtful tone.
“Lev, my friend, you want life and poetry to be the same thing. Why are you
so angry with the man?”
Rubin looked sourer still.
“So you’re ready to be on the receiving end? Ready for a second Hiroshima,
this time on Russian soil?”
“And you think stealing the bomb is the way to prevent that? The bomb must
be morally outlawed, not stolen!”
“Outlawed? How? Idealistic raving!”
“Very simply. You just have to believe in the United Nations. You were
offered the Baruch plan—you should have signed on to it! But no, the Big Chief
must have the bomb!”
Rubin was standing with his back to the exercise yard and the path, but
Nerzhin, facing the other way, saw Doronin rapidly approaching and
whispered a warning—“Careful, Ruska’s coming. Don’t turn around”—then
went on hurriedly, with no apparent break in the conversation—“Tell me, did
you come across the 689th artillery regiment out there?”
“Who did you know in it?” Rubin, not yet tuned in, reluctantly answered.
“Major Kandybu. A curious thing happened to him. . . .”
“Gentlemen!” said Ruska Doronin, in a cheerful, guileless voice.
Rubin turned round with a grunt and frowned at him.
“What do you want, Junior?”
Rostislav’s candid gaze rested on Rubin. His face radiated honesty.
“Lev Grigorievich! It’s very upsetting. I come to you with an open heart, and
the very people I trust most look at me suspiciously. What can I expect from the
rest? Gentlemen! I’ve come to make you an offer: If you like, I’ll sell all the
Judases during the dinner break tomorrow, at the very moment when they pick
up their thirty pieces of silver!”