Chapter-07-A-Woman’s-Heart

SERAFIMA VITALIEVNA, a young woman so small that it was difficult not to call
her Simochka, was an MGB lieutenant. She wore an orange blouse and a warm
shawl around her shoulders.
The free personnel in this building were all MGB officers.
In accordance with the Constitution, free personnel had a great variety of
rights, among them the right to work. This right, however, was limited by the
eight-hour day and by the fact that their labor created no added value,
consisting solely in watching prisoners. Whereas the prisoners, though
deprived of all other rights, had an ampler right to work—up to twelve hours a
day. During the additional hours—from 6:00 to 11:00 p.m., including the
supper break—the free personnel of each lab had to take turns supervising the
prisoners’ work.
Today it was Simochka’s turn. All power and all authority in the Acoustics
Lab was for the present vested in this small, sparrowlike girl.
She was supposed to see to it that the prisoners worked and did not slacken,
that they did not make use of the workplace to manufacture weapons or try to
tunnel out, and that they did not avail themselves of the radio parts abundantly
provided to rig up shortwave transmitters. At 10:50 she had to take all secret
documentation from them, put it in a big safe, and seal the door of the
laboratory.
It was not quite six months since Simochka had graduated from the Institute
of Communications Engineering and, on the strength of her spotless record,
been appointed to this special, secret scientific research institute, known only
by a number but called by prisoners in their irreverent vernacular a
“sharashka.” Free personnel were given officer’s rank as soon as they were
taken on and paid twice the salary of an ordinary engineer (in recognition of
their rank and for their uniform), and all that was asked was devotion to duty
and vigilance, literacy and professional skills being of secondary importance.
This suited Simochka very well. She, and many of her classmates with her,
had carried away no knowledge when she left the institute. For a number of
reasons. The girls had arrived from school knowing no mathematics and no
physics (they had found out in the higher classes that teachers who gave low
marks were upbraided by the headmaster at staff meetings, so that you could
get your graduation certificate without studying at all). Then, in the institute, if
there was ever time for it, the girls sat down to work at their math and radio
technology as if they were lost in a bewildering, pathless, alien forest. More
often than not, there just wasn’t time to study. For a month and more every
autumn, students were whisked off to collective farms to dig potatoes, so that
for the rest of the year they had eight or even ten lectures a day, with no time to
go over their notes. Monday was political education day, and there would be
another compulsory meeting of some sort later in the week. Then “social
work”: wall newspapers, amateur concerts . . . help out at home, do the
shopping, wash, change your clothes . . . an evening at the movies, the theater,
the club. If you can’t have fun, can’t dance a bit in your student days, you may
never get another chance. Young people aren’t meant to work themselves to
death.
To Simochka and her friends, preparation for exams meant preparing a lot of
crib sheets, hiding them in articles of female attire inaccessible to males, then
retrieving the necessary piece of paper in the exam room, smoothing it out, and
pretending that it was rough work produced on the spot. The examiners could,
of course, have shown up the inadequacy of their students’ knowledge by
supplementary questions, but they were overburdened themselves with
committee work, open meetings, proliferating plans, progress reports to the
dean and to the rector, so that redoing the exam would have been one chore too
many. What is more, they would have been under attack for a high failure rate,
just as though they had turned out defective goods in a factory: Someone would
have quoted Krupskaya
* (was it?) to the effect that there are no bad pupils,
only bad teachers. The examiners therefore did their best not to shoot the
candidates down but to bring the exam to the quickest and most favorable
conclusion.
As senior students, Simochka and her friends admitted to themselves with
dismay that they still had no great liking for their chosen profession and indeed
found it tiresome. But it was too late to change. Simochka shuddered at the
thought of working in a factory.
Then, suddenly, she found herself at Marfino. What pleased her about the
place from the start was that she was given no independent work assignment.
But you didn’t have to be a frail little thing like Simochka to feel uneasy
entering the confines of this isolated fortress beyond the city limits, where
handpicked guards and security officers kept watch over major political
offenders.
They had all been briefed together—all ten girl graduates of the Institute of
Communications Engineering. They were informed that they had landed in a
place worse than any battlefield—a snake pit, in which one careless move
could mean disaster. They were told that they would be meeting the dregs of
humanity, people unworthy of the Russian language that they so unfortunately
spoke. They were warned that these people were especially dangerous
because they never bared their fangs but invariably wore a false mask of
politeness and good breeding. And if you questioned them about their crimes
(which was expressly prohibited!), they would try by an ingenious tissue of
lies to represent themselves as innocent victims. The girls were instructed that
they in turn should not vent their hatred on these reptiles but make an outward
show of politeness—without, however, entering into discussions of anything
except the work at hand, never accepting messages for the outside world. And
at the very first breach of regulations, suspicion of a breach, or possibility of
suspecting a breach, they must hurry along to the security officer, Major Shikin.
Major Shikin—a short, dark-complexioned, self-important man with bristly
graying hair on his large head and small feet in boy-size shoes—added the
thought that although the reptilian interior of these malefactors was as clear as
could be to experienced people like himself, there might possibly be among
inexperienced girls like these new arrivals one who in the mistaken kindness
of her heart could commit a breach of regulations by, for instance, lending a
prisoner a book from the employees’ library. (Not to mention mailing a letter,
because any letter, whatever Maria Ivanovna it was addressed to, would
inevitably be sent on to an American spy center.) Major Shikin earnestly
begged the girls, if they saw one of their number fall, to come to her rescue like
true friends by frankly informing Major Shikin what had happened.
In conclusion, the major did not conceal the fact that a liaison with a prisoner
was punishable under the criminal code, which, as everyone knows, is
sufficiently elastic to include sentences of twenty-five years’ hard labor.
It was impossible to contemplate the joyless years ahead of them without a
shudder. Some of the girls indeed had tears in their eyes. But the seeds of
distrust had been sown, and as they left the briefing session they talked about
other matters, not about what they had just heard.
More dead than alive, Simochka had followed Engineer Major Roitman into
the Acoustics Lab, at first hardly daring to open her eyes.
That was six months ago, and since then something strange had happened to
Simochka. No, her belief in the dark machinations of imperialism had not been
shaken. Nor was it any less easy for her to suppose that the prisoners working
in all the other rooms were bloodstained criminals. But in the dozen zeks
whom she met daily in the Acoustics Lab—people gloomily indifferent to
freedom, to their own lot, to the ten years or the quarter-century of
imprisonment before them, the scholars, the engineers, and designer-fitters
preoccupied day in and day out with nothing but the work that was not their
own, pointless work, which would bring them not a penny in earnings or a
smidgen of fame—in these people she strove in vain to detect the notorious
international criminals so easily recognized by the moviegoer and so deftly
ferreted out by Soviet counterespionage.
Simochka had no fear of them. Nor could she find it in herself to hate them.
These people inspired in her nothing but unqualified respect—for the range of
their knowledge and the stoicism with which they bore their misfortune. And
for all the alarm bells of her Komsomol conscience,
** however much love of
the fatherland nagged at her to report every trick and misdemeanor on the part
of prisoners to the security officer—for some inexplicable reason Simochka
had begun to feel that it would be unthinkably mean to do so.
It was even more obviously impossible where her nearest neighbor and
fellow worker was concerned—Gleb Nerzhin, who sat facing her over their
two desktops. Simochka had worked closely with him ever since her arrival,
assigned to assist him in carrying out experiments on articulation. The Marfino
sharashka was required from time to time to assess the quality of voice
reproduction over particular telephone circuits. Excellent as their equipment
was, no instrument had yet been invented which would indicate this by the
movement of a needle. Only the voice of a speaker reading out separate
syllables, words, and phrases, and the ears of listeners trying to pick up the
text at the other end of the line, could provide a measurement in terms of the
incidence of error. These experiments were what they called “articulation
tests.”
Nerzhin was busy—at least he was meant by his superiors to be busy—
looking for the optimum mathematical programming of these tests. They were
going well, and Nerzhin had even put together a three-volume monograph on
their methodology. When he and Simochka had a great accumulation of work to
get through, Nerzhin would establish priorities and give firm instructions. His
face looked so youthful as he did so that Simochka, who thought of war as it
was shown in the movies, pictured Nerzhin at such moments in his captain’s
uniform, in the midst of cannon smoke, his light brown hair windblown,
shouting out “Fire!” to his battery. A scene seldom omitted in war movies.
But if Nerzhin wanted things done in a hurry, it was in order to put the
obvious tasks behind him and avoid further effort for as long as possible. He
had once said as much to Simochka: “I’m active because I hate activity.”
“What do you like, then?” she asked timidly.
“Thinking.”
And, in fact, once the flurry of work abated, he would sit for hours, hardly
changing his position, looking old, gray-faced, and haggard.
Where was his self-assurance now? He was slow and irresolute; he
pondered lengthily before adding a sentence or two to the minutely written
notes that Simochka could, not for the first time, see among the untidy heap of
reference books and technical articles. She had even noticed that he tucked
them away somewhere on the left-hand side of his desk but not, apparently, in a
drawer. Simochka felt faint with curiosity: What was he writing, and for
whom? Nerzhin had unwittingly become the focus of her compassion and rapt
admiration.
Simochka’s girlhood had held nothing but unhappiness so far. She was not
pretty: Her looks were spoiled by a nose much too long and hair that had
refused to grow out, gathered now into a skimpy bun at the back. She was not
just small, she was extremely small, and her figure was that of a fourteen-yearold
schoolgirl rather than a grown woman. She was, moreover, straitlaced,
averse to jokes and frivolity, which made her still less attractive to young men.
So it was that in her twenty-third year no one had ever courted her, hugged her,
or kissed her.
Then, just a month ago, something had gone wrong with the microphone in the
testing booth; Nerzhin called Simochka over to fix it, and she had come into the
booth holding a screwdriver. In the soundproof and airless confined space,
where there was scarcely room for two people, she had bent over the
microphone that Nerzhin was already inspecting, and her cheek had brushed
against his. Their cheeks touched—and she froze in horror: What would
happen next? She should have pulled away from him, but she continued
stupidly inspecting the microphone. It dragged on and on, this most terrifying
moment in her life—their cheeks, close together, were burning—and he didn’t
move! Then, suddenly, he took her head in his hands and kissed her on the lips.
A blissful weakness flooded Simochka’s body. What she said at the moment
had nothing to do with the Komsomol or the motherland. . . .
“The door isn’t locked!” A flimsy blue blind fluttered between them and the
noise outside, the people walking about and talking, who might draw the blind
aside and walk in. The prisoner Nerzhin was risking nothing except ten days in
the punishment cells, but the girl was putting at risk her clean record, her
career, perhaps even her freedom; yet she hadn’t the strength to break loose
from the hands that tilted back her head.
For the first time in her life she had been kissed by a man!
So the steel chain forged with such reptilian cunning snapped at the link that
had been fashioned from a woman’s heart.
* Krupskaya: Nadezhda Krupskaya, Lenin’s wife and an active revolutionary
in her own right.
** Komsomol: The League of Young Communists, the youth arm of the
Communist Party.