Chapter-56-Winding-Up-the-Twentieth

ABRAMSON, MEANWHILE, lay as before, shoulder and cheek snug against a
plump pillow, greedily devouring The Count of Monte Cristo. He had turned
his back on the proceedings. Courtroom comedy did not appeal to him. He did
look around briefly when Chelnov spoke, because the details were new to him.
At one time Abramson was easily aroused to a frenzy of eloquence and could
hold forth endlessly without getting hoarse. But twenty years of exile, transit
prisons, investigation centers, solitary confinement, labor camps, and
sharashkas had left him insensitive and indifferent to suffering—his own and
that of those around him.
The mock trial that had just taken place was dedicated to the fate of the
1945–46 “stream.” Abramson could acknowledge theoretically that the fate of
former POWs was tragic, but they were only one stream, one of many, and not
the most remarkable. Insofar as the ex–prisoners of war were interesting, it
was because they had seen many foreign lands (“real live false witnesses,”
Potapov jokingly called them); but, all in all, their “stream” was an
undistinguished one; they were merely helpless victims of war, not people who
had voluntarily chosen political struggle as their way of life.
Every stream of zeks into the NKVD pool, like each new generation of
people on earth, has its own history and its own heroes.
And it is difficult for one generation to understand another.
As Abramson saw it, these people could not possibly be compared with
titans like himself who, at the end of the twenties, voluntarily chose banishment
to the Yenisei when they could have retracted what they had said at Party
meetings and gone on living comfortably. They were all given the choice. But
these were people who could not bear the distortion and degradation of the
Revolution and were ready to sacrifice themselves to sanitize it. This “youthful
tribe unknown” had entered the cells thirty years after the October Revolution
and simply repeated, with a sprinkling of peasant obscenities, the very things
for which the Cheka’s execution squads had shot, burned, and drowned people
in the Civil War.
So Abramson, although he felt no personal hostility to particular ex-POWs
and never argued with them individually, did not like the breed as a whole.
In any case he had (or so he assured himself) long since ceased to react to
arguments, confessions, and eyewitness accounts from fellow prisoners. He
had long lost the curiosity he may have felt in his youth about what was being
said in another corner of the cell. Once he had lived for his work, but his
enthusiasm had long ago burned itself out. He could not live for his family
because he was not from Moscow, he was never allowed visitors, and letters
that came to the sharashka had been unwittingly drained of the juices of real
life by their writers before the censor ever saw them. Nor did he let the
newspapers hold his attention: A glance at the headlines made it obvious what
the paper would be saying. He could listen to music on the radio for not more
than one hour a day, and his nerves could simply not stand programs consisting
of words or lying books. So that although somewhere deep inside himself,
beyond seven defensive barriers, he had preserved not just a lively but a
painfully acute interest in what was happening in the world, and to the creed to
which he had dedicated his life, externally he affected total indifference to
everything around him. The Trotskyist who had survived his turn to be shot,
starved to death, or harried into the grave now preferred not books red-hot
with truth but those that diverted him and helped to while away his
interminable sentence.
Ah, but in 1929, out in the taiga, on the Yenisei, they had not been reading
Monte Cristo. Pretending that it was to celebrate the New Year, they flocked to
the distant village of Doshchany on the Angara, which was reached by a threehundred-verst
sledge track through the taiga, from places a hundred versts
deeper into the forest for a conference of exiles on their country’s situation,
international and domestic. It was more than fifty-eight degrees below zero.
The slow-but-sure iron stove in the corner was quite inadequate to warm the
exaggeratedly spacious Siberian hut; the built-in Russian stove was in ruins
(which was why the hut had been given to the exiles). The walls of the hut
were frozen through. At intervals in the dead of night, the timbers would emit a
sharp sound like a rifle shot.
The conference opened with a report by Satanevich on the policy of the Party
in the countryside. He took off his cap, releasing an unruly black forelock, but
kept on his short fur coat with the eternal English phrase book (“We must know
our enemy”) sticking out of one pocket. Satanevich always assumed the role of
leader. He was, so it was said, subsequently shot during a strike at Vorkuta.
In his report, Satanevich recognized the rational kernel of the Party’s policy.
The conservative peasantry had to be curbed by draconian Stalinist methods,
or else the tide of reaction would inundate the cities and drown the Revolution.
(It was time now to admit that the peasantry had overwhelmed the cities
anyway, drowned them in a petit-bourgeois flood, drowned even the Party
apparatus that had been sapped by purges, and so destroyed the Revolution.)
Alas, the more passionate the debates were, the more they damaged the unity
of the puny group of exiles. It became clear that there were not just two
opinions, not just three, but as many as there were people. Toward morning,
too tired to go on, they would wind up the official part of the conference
without agreeing on a resolution.
Then they ate and drank from the state’s crockery, decoratively nestling
among fir twigs that hid the ruts and ragged splinters of the table. The thawing
twigs smelled of snow and resin and pricked people’s hands. They drank
moonshine liquor. They proposed toasts and swore that none of those present
would ever capitulate and sign a recantation. A political storm would break in
the Soviet Union any month now!
Then they sang famous Revolutionary songs: “La Varsovienne,” “Our Banner
Flutters Over the Whole World,” “The Black Baron.” . . .
And they went on arguing about anything and everything.
Roza, who had worked in a Kharkov tobacco factory, had sat on her feather
mattress (she had brought it with her from the Ukraine to Siberia and was very
proud of the fact), smoking one cigarette after another and scornfully tossing
her short curly hair: “I can’t stand intellectuals! They revolt me with their ‘fine
distinctions’ and ‘complications.’ Human psychology is much simpler than preRevolutionary
writers chose to portray it. Our task is to free humanity from its
superfluous spiritual burdens!”
Somehow or other they got around to women’s jewelry. One exile, Patrushev,
formerly a public prosecutor in the Crimea, whose fiancée had in fact recently
come from Russia to see him, exclaimed defiantly, “Why do you want to make
the society of the future poorer than it need be? Why shouldn’t I dream of a
time when every girl will be able to wear pearls? When every man will be
able to crown the bride of his choice with a diadem?”
What an uproar this had created! How furiously they had pelted him with
quotations from Marx and Plekhanov, from Campanella and Feuerbach.
The society of the future! How confidently they talked about it!
The sun rose on the new year, the one thousand nine hundred and thirtieth,
and they all went outside to admire it. It was a bracing, frosty morning with
columns of pink smoke rising straight toward the pink sky. Women were
driving cattle along the broad, white Angara to their watering place, a hole in
the ice with fir logs around it. The men of the village and their horses were
nowhere to be seen. They had been packed off to fell and haul timber.
Two decades went by. The causes they had toasted lost their bloom and their
relevance. Those who remained firm to the end were shot. And those who
capitulated were shot just the same. Abramson was left behind with his
memories—and an understanding of those years that matured unseen in one
sharashka after another, like a sapling under a bell jar.
Abramson’s eyes were on his book but not reading, when Nerzhin came and
sat on the edge of his bed.
They had met first in a cell in Butyrki Prison three years before. Potapov was
in the same cell. Abramson was nearing the end of his first ten-year jail
sentence at the time, and his cellmates were impressed by this experienced
prisoner’s air of ice-cold authority, his deep-rooted skepticism about prison
matters; but secretly he cherished the insane hope that he would shortly return
to his family.
They had gone their different ways. Abramson was in fact shortly released,
by some oversight, and was free just long enough for his family to pull up
stakes and move to Sterlitamak, where the militia was willing to give him a
residence permit. But no sooner had his family moved than they pulled him in,
subjected him to a single interrogation, in which he was asked whether he was
indeed the Abramson who had been in exile from 1929 to 1934 and since then
in jail. Having established that he had in fact served and completed and even
somewhat exceeded the term to which he had been sentenced, the Special
Tribunal rewarded him for it with a further ten years. Those in charge of the
special prisons (sharashkas) discovered from the main All-Union card index
that their former employee was inside again and promptly yanked him out to
work for them. Abramson was transported to Marfino, where, as you always
do in the convict world, he met old acquaintances, Nerzhin and Potapov among
them. When they stood together on the stairway smoking, Abramson felt as
though he had not spent a year as a free man, at home with his family, had not
rewarded his wife with an additional daughter, felt that it had all been the sort
of cruel dream that breaks a prisoner’s heart and that prison was the only
concrete reality in this world.
Nerzhin had sat down by Abramson to invite him to his birthday party.
Abramson belatedly wished him many happy returns and, squinting from under
his glasses, asked who would be there. The realization that he would have to
struggle into his overalls, ruining the Sunday hours that would have been so
pleasantly and profitably spent in his underwear, and that he would have to
abandon an entertaining book for what they called a birthday party gave
Abramson no pleasure at all. The worst of it was that he did not expect to have
a good time but was more or less certain that a political argument would flare
up, as futile and as unrewarding as ever, and that it would be impossible not to
get involved and equally impossible to let himself be involved, because
revealing his most private thoughts to “junior” prisoners would be like
exhibiting his wife in the nude.
Nerzhin went through the guest list. Rubin was the only one in the sharashka
who was on close terms with Abramson, though he would have to be told off
for today’s farce, which was unworthy of a true Communist. Sologdin and
Pryanchikov Abramson did not like. Though, strangely enough, Rubin and
Sologdin were supposed to be friends, perhaps because they had been
neighbors on the bedboards at Butyrki. The prison administration made little
distinction between them and, when the November anniversary celebrations
came around, whisked them off to Lefortovo for a holiday away from it all.
Still, Abramson could not refuse the invitation. He was informed that the
merrymaking would begin in half an hour’s time. Between Potapov’s and
Pryanchikov’s beds. Just as soon as Andreich had made the artificial cream.
While they were talking, Nerzhin noticed what Abramson was reading and
said: “As it happens, I once started rereading Monte Cristo in prison but
didn’t finish it. I couldn’t help noticing that although Dumas tries to make the
reader’s flesh creep, the Château d’If as he portrays it is a thoroughly
patriarchal prison. Never mind his disregard of such nice little details as the
daily carrying out of the night bucket—Dumas doesn’t mention it because,
being a free man, he never thinks of it—just ask yourself why Dantes
succeeded in escaping? Because, of course, there were no cell searches for
years on end, although they are supposed to be carried out weekly.
Consequently their tunneling went undiscovered. Then again, the screws in
charge of them were not relieved regularly, though, as we know from
experience of the Lubyanka, they should be changed every two hours, so that
the next guard can look for signs that the one before has been negligent.
Furthermore, nobody entered or peeped into the cells at the Château d’If from
one morning to the next. There weren’t even any spy holes in the doors. In
short, it wasn’t a prison but a seaside holiday resort! They thought nothing of
leaving a metal saucepan in a cell, and Dantes used it to scoop a hole in the
floor. To cap it all, they trustingly sewed the dead man up in a sack, without
first branding his body with a red-hot iron in the morgue, then failed to pierce
it with a bayonet in the guardhouse. Dumas should have worried less about
atmosphere and more about elementary procedure.”
Nerzhin never read just for amusement. What he looked for in a book were
allies and enemies. He reached a precisely formulated verdict on every book
he read and liked to force it on others.
Abramson, who knew this tiresome habit of his, listened without raising his
head from the pillow, observing him calmly through his square glasses.
“All right, I’ll be there,” he said, then made himself more comfortable and
went on with his reading.