Chapter-84-As-for-Shooting-.-.-.

MAJOR SHIKIN HAD BEEN INVESTIGATING “the Case of the Broken Lathe” for a
week and was still baffled; all he knew for sure was that this lathe—with its
open graduated sheave, its manually operated rear spindle, and its dual
transmission (manual or belt drive), manufactured in Russia in 1916 in the heat
of the First World War—had been, on orders from Yakonov, disconnected from
its motor in No. 3 Laboratory for delivery to the engineering workshops. Since
the two sides could not agree on how to transport it, the laboratory staff was
ordered to get the lathe down to the basement corridor, where the engineers
would take over, wrestle it upstairs to the yard, and across the yard to the
workshops. (There was a shorter way, which did not involve lowering the
lathe into the basement, but this would have meant allowing zeks onto the front
yard, in full view of the main road and park, which for security reasons could
not be allowed.)
Of course, now that something irreparable had happened, Shikin privately
recognized that he was as much to blame as anyone; he had attached no
importance to this major industrial operation and had failed to keep a close eye
on it. The mistakes of men of action are obvious enough in historical
perspective; nobody is infallible!
In the event, the staff of No. 3 Laboratory, comprising one supervisor, one
man, one disabled man, and one girl, could not move the lathe unaided. So,
without authorization, ten prisoners were recruited at random from various
rooms. No one had even thought of noting their names, and it cost Major Shikin
two weeks of hard work to collate different accounts and reconstitute the full
list of suspects. These ten prisoners had actually lowered the heavy lathe from
the first floor to the basement. The engineers, however, had not provided a
working party (their boss, for technical reasons of his own, was in no hurry to
get his hands on the lathe) or even sent someone to check and confirm delivery.
The ten conscripted zeks, having dragged the lathe down to the basement
without supervision, dispersed. The lathe stood for several more days blocking
the hallway in the basement (Shikin himself had bumped into it). When, at last,
people from the engineering workshops came for it, they spotted a crack in the
plate, made a fuss, and left the lathe where it was until they were compelled to
remove it three days later.
Shikin’s “case” was based on that fatal crack. It might not be the reason why
the lathe was still not working (Shikin had heard doubts expressed), but the
implications of the crack were much wider than the crack itself. The crack
signified that hostile forces, as yet unmasked, were at work in the institute. It
signified also that those in charge of the institute were blindly trusting and
criminally slack.
If the investigation was successful, and the criminal and real motives of his
crime exposed, it would be possible not only to punish one man and deter
others but to make the crack the occasion of a major political-educational
campaign in the collective. And, finally, Major Shikin’s professional honor
demanded that he unravel this sinister tangle!
But it was not easy. So much time had been lost. The prisoners who had
moved the lathe would by now have made a criminal compact and agreed to
vouch for one another. Not a single free worker (a horrifying oversight, this!)
had been present, and there was only one informer among the ten carriers, a
worm-eaten character whose greatest feat to date had been to report a bedsheet
cut up for dickeys. He had helped to complete the list of ten men but had
nothing else to offer. For the rest, all ten zeks, brazenly confident that they
would escape punishment, maintained that they had carried the lathe to the
basement undamaged, had not slid it downstairs on its mounting, and had not
bumped it from step to step. Moreover, according to their evidence, no one had
been holding that part of the lathe under the rear mandrel where the crack had
developed; they were all gripping it beneath the sheave and the spindle. In
pursuit of the truth, the major had drawn several diagrams of the lathe, showing
where each of the carriers stood. But as the interrogations proceeded, Shikin
seemed more likely to master the turner’s trade than to discover who was
responsible for the crack. The only person who could be accused, if not of
sabotage, of intent to carry out sabotage, was the engineer Potapov. Losing his
temper after three hours of questioning, he had blurted out, “Look, if I’d
wanted to wreck that old washtub, I’d simply have sprinkled a handful of sand
in the bearings, and that would have done the trick! Why bother to smash the
mounting?”
This statement from a hardened saboteur Shikin promptly recorded, but
Potapov refused to sign it.
What made this investigation so difficult was that Shikin could not resort to
the usual means of getting at the truth: solitary confinement, the punishment
cell, a smack or two in the kisser, short rations, nighttime interrogations. . . .
He could not even take the elementary precaution of holding those under
investigation in separate cells. They had to put in a full day’s work and so must
be allowed to eat and sleep normally.
Still, as early as Saturday, Shikin managed to wring out of one prisoner the
admission that when they were descending the last steps and blocking the
narrow doorway, Spiridon the yardman appeared, shouted, “Hold on, boys, let
me give a hand!” took hold of it—so becoming the eleventh man—and helped
to carry it to its destination. The only conclusion to be drawn from the diagram
was that he had gripped the base beneath the rear mandrel.
It was this valuable new thread that Shikin proposed to unravel that Monday,
neglecting reports on “The Trial of Prince Igor” received from stoolies early in
the morning. Immediately before lunch, he summoned the ginger-haired
yardman, who came from work just as he was, in a donkey jacket held together
by a frayed canvas belt, took off his big-eared cap and fumbled with it guiltily,
the very picture of a peasant waiting on his lord to beg a patch of arable land.
He was careful, too, not to step off the little rubber mat and leave footmarks on
the floor. Shikin glanced disapprovingly at his wet boots and sternly at the man
himself, then let him stand there while he sat in his easy chair silently scanning
various documents. From time to time, as if shocked by the evidence of
Yegorov’s criminality, he shot a startled glance at this bloodthirsty beast, caged
at long last. (Procedures prescribed by the science of interrogation for denting
a prisoner’s morale.) A half hour of unbroken silence went by behind Shikin’s
locked door, the lunch bell rang loud and clear, reminding Spiridon of the letter
he expected from home, but Shikin paid no attention to bells. He went on
silently shuffling thick folders and transferring things from one drawer to
another, frowning over document after document, and glancing briefly at
dejected, hangdog, shamefaced Spiridon, as though astounded by what he read.
The last drop of water from Spiridon’s boots had finally trickled onto the mat
and left them quite dry when Shikin said, “All right, then: Come closer!”
(Spiridon moved toward him.) “Stop there! This here—what is it?”
He held out a photograph of a youngster in German uniform, bareheaded.
Spiridon bent over, screwed up his eyes, glanced at it, and said
apologetically: “I’m a little bit blind, see, Major. Let me get a close look.”
Shikin gave permission. Still holding his shaggy cap in one hand, Spiridon
framed the photograph with all five fingers of the other, turned it to catch the
light from the window at different angles, moved it past his left eye, and
scrutinized it minutely.
“No,” he said with a sigh of relief. “Never seen him.”
Shikin took the photograph back.
“Yegorov,” he said sadly, “denial will only make it worse for you. All right,
then, sit down”—he indicated a distant chair—“we’re in for a long talk, too
long for you to stay on your feet.”
After which he fell silent and buried himself in his papers again.
Spiridon backed over to the chair and sat down. At first he laid his cap on
the chair next to him, but after a sideways look at its spotless soft leather, he
changed his mind. Resting his cap on his knees, he sat hunched up, drooping, a
picture of abject contrition.
He was, in fact, thinking, What a snake you are! What a dirty dog! When am I
going to get my letter? Maybe you’ve got it here?
To Spiridon, who had undergone investigation twice in his time, been
“reinvestigated” once, and seen thousands of prisoners under investigation,
Shikin’s little game was crystal clear. But he knew that he must pretend to take
it seriously.
“The fact is we’ve received further information about you,” Shikin said, with
a deep sigh. “It seems you got up to all sorts of mischief in Germany.”
“It might not have been me, though,” Spiridon said reassuringly. “Believe
me, Citizen Major, us Yegorovs were like flies in Germany. I’ve even heard
say there was a General Yegorov.”
“What do you mean, not you? Of course it’s you! Look here”—he jabbed the
file with his finger—“Spiridon Danilovich! And your date of birth.”
“My date of birth? So it isn’t me,” Spiridon said confidently. “I always
kidded the Germans I was three years older.”
“All right, then.” Shikin’s face brightened, and he spoke more briskly, as if
he saw no need to continue this tedious interrogation. He pushed all the
documents away.
“Before I forget. You helped to carry a lathe down to the basement ten days
ago. Remember, Yegorov?”
“Er, yes.”
“So where did you run into a bit of trouble? On the stairs or down in the
hallway?”
“Bit of trouble?” Spiridon sounded surprised. “There wasn’t any fighting.”
“Where did you bash the lathe?”
“God bless you, Citizen Major, why would we be bashing a lathe? How
could a lathe upset anybody?”
“Yes, well, that’s just what I’m wondering. Why did it get broken? Maybe
you just dropped it?”
“Dropped it? We held its little hands and went ever so carefully, like it was a
child.”
“And you yourself, where were you holding it?”
“Me? On this side, of course.”
“Which side?”
“My side.”
“Did you grip it under the rear mandrel or under the spindle?”
“I wouldn’t know anything about mandrels, Citizen Major. Let me just show
you.”
He rose, slapped his cap down on the next chair, and turned around as if
lugging the lathe through the office door.
“I was bent over like this, see. Backing. And those two got stuck in the door,
see.”
“Which two?”
“I don’t know them from Adam. We haven’t stood godfathers to each others’
kids. I shouted, ‘Stop! Let me get a better grip!’ And that great big what-doyou-call-it
goes. . . .”
“What what-do-you-call it?”
“You know what I mean!” said Spiridon, over his shoulder. He was
beginning to get angry. “The thing we were carrying, of course.”
“The lathe, you mean?”
“The lathe, then! I shifted my grip.” He bent his knees and tensed his body to
show how. “One fellow squeezed in at the side, another shoved his way
through, and between the three of us, we managed to keep hold of it easy
enough.”
He straightened up.
“In my time on the kolkhoz, we shifted heavier things than that. Six of our
women could have managed that lathe, easy as pie, and carried it a verst.
‘Where’s that lathe?’ they’d say. ‘Let’s go and lift it just for fun!’ ”
“Do you mean it wasn’t dropped?” the major asked menacingly.
“I’m telling you it wasn’t!”
“So who broke it?”
“It really did get busted?” Spiridon sounded surprised.
“Hmmm, well. . . .”
He had finished showing how the lathe was carried, so he sat down again
and was all ears.
“Was it undamaged? When they collected it?”
“I didn’t see, so I can’t say. Maybe it was broken before.”
“And when you set it down, how was it?”
“It wasn’t damaged then, I keep telling you!”
“Except for the crack in the mandrel?”
“There wasn’t any crack,” Spiridon answered confidently.
“How could you see there wasn’t, you walleyed devil? You’re as good as
blind, aren’t you?”
“I’m blind, Citizen Major, when it comes to paper. When I’m doing my job, I
can see everything. You and the other citizen officers keep dropping your
cigarette butts when you walk across the yard, and I have to rake it clean; even
when there’s white snow on the ground, I rake it all up. You can ask the
commandant.”
“So what are you saying? You put the lathe down and looked it over
carefully?”
“What do you think? We’d done the job, so we stopped for a smoke, as usual.
We all gave the lathe a friendly slap.”
“Friendly slap? What with?”
“The flat of the hand, of course, like this, on its side, like you might a horse
in a sweat. One of the engineers said, ‘A nice little lathe, this. My granddad
was a turner; he worked on one like this.’ ”
Shikin sighed and reached for a clean sheet of paper.
“It looks very bad, Yegorov, your refusal to confess even now. We will have
to bring charges. It’s obviously you who broke the lathe. If it wasn’t, you’d
point to the culprit.”
He spoke confidently, but inside he was no longer so sure of himself. He had
been master of the situation, he had been the interrogator, the yardman had
answered readily and in great detail, but the first hours of the investigation—
the prolonged silence, the photographs, the raising and lowering of the voice,
the lively discussion of the lathe—had been a complete waste of time. That this
ginger-headed prisoner, with the permanent obliging smile and the
deferentially bowed shoulders, had not yielded immediately meant he never
would.
When Spiridon had mentioned General Yegorov, he had already firmly
concluded that this confrontation had nothing at all to do with Germany, that the
photograph was a fake, that the godfather was bluffing and had summoned him
precisely because of the lathe. It would have been a miracle if he had not been
sent for. The other ten had been shaken like pear trees in autumn for a whole
week. After a lifetime of hoodwinking authority, Spiridon had easily held his
own in this tiresome game. But so much pointless talk grated. What vexed him
most was the further delay in handing over his letter. And although Shikin’s
office was a nice, warm, dry place to sit in, nobody else would be doing
Spiridon’s work out in the yard, and it would just mount up for tomorrow.
Time was going by, and the bell for the end of the break had rung long ago,
when Shikin ordered Spiridon to sign an admission of responsibility under
Article 95 for making false depositions, recorded his own questions, and
twisted Spiridon’s answers to the best of his ability.
At this point, there was a sharp tap on the door.
As he showed out Yegorov, whose muddleheadedness had gotten on his
nerves, Shikin encountered the businesslike reptile Siromakha, who could
always give you the gist in a few words.
Siromakha glided in noiselessly. The startling news he had brought and his
special position among the informers put Siromakha on the same footing as the
major. He closed the door behind him and, before Shikin could take hold of the
key, raised his hand in a melodramatic gesture. He was playacting. Speaking
clearly but quietly, so that no one could overhear him through the door, he
reported that “Doronin is going around showing people his money order for
147 rubles. He’s fingered Lyubimichev, Kagan, and five others. Doronin’s lot
ganged up in the yard and trapped them. Is he one of yours?”
Shikin grabbed his collar and tugged at it to ease his neck. His eyes looked
as though they had been squeezed out of deep holes. His thick neck was a dull
red. He rushed to the telephone. His face, usually supremely complacent, was
that of a madman.
Siromakha arrived not at walking pace but in a series of catlike jumps to
prevent the major from lifting the receiver.
“Comrade Major!”—as a prisoner he ought not to say “Comrade” but as a
friend he was obliged to—“not right away! Catch him unawares.”
Elementary prison wisdom! But even this he had to be reminded of!
Zigzagging as though he saw a bear behind him, Siromakha backed toward
the door. He did not take his eyes off the major.
Shikin took a drink of water.
“Can I go, Comrade Major?”
It was hardly a question.
“If I learn anything more, I’ll come back this evening or tomorrow morning.”
Sense slowly returned to Shikin’s goggling eyes.
“Nine grams of lead, that’s what the swine can expect” were his first hoarse
words. “I’ll fix him!”
Siromakha left noiselessly, as though from a sickroom. He had only done his
duty as he saw it and was in no hurry for his reward.
He was not altogether sure that Shikin had a future as a major in the Ministry
of State Security.
This was an exceptional event not just at the Marfino Institute but in the
whole history of the security services. Rabbits had every right to die. They had
no right to fight back.
THE CALL TO THE HEAD of the Vacuum Laboratory came not from Shikin
directly but through the man on duty at a desk in the hallway of the institute:
Doronin was to report to Engineer Colonel Yakonov immediately.
The overhead lights had been on for some time in the Vacuum Lab, although it
was only four in the afternoon. It was always dark there. The head of the
laboratory was absent, so it was Klara who took the call. She had just arrived
for the evening shift, later than usual, had been chatting with Tamara, and had
not once looked at Ruska, though Ruska’s burning gaze never left her. The hand
that held the receiver was still wearing a scarlet glove. She spoke with
downcast eyes, while Ruska stood at his pump three steps away devouring her
with his gaze, imagining how that evening, when everybody else had gone to
supper, he would take that head in his hands and kiss it. With Klara so close,
he lost all awareness of his surroundings.
She raised her eyes (no need to look for him, she sensed his presence) and
said: “Rostislav Vadimovich! Anton Nikolaevich wants to see you at once,
urgently!”
She could not have spoken differently with people watching and listening—
but her eyes! Her eyes were different! Substitutes! As though a dull, lifeless
film had formed over them.
Ruska obeyed mechanically, without wondering what this unexpected
summons to the engineer colonel might mean. He could think of nothing but
Klara’s expression. He looked back at her from the doorway: Her eyes were
following him, but she averted her gaze immediately.
Unfaithful eyes. She had looked away because she was afraid.
What could have happened to her?
With his mind on her alone, he went up the stairs to the duty officer, his
normal wariness in abeyance, unmindful of the need to prepare himself for
surprise questions, for a head-on attack, as a nimble-witted prisoner should—
and the orderly officer barred the way to Yakonov’s office and pointed to
Major Shikin’s door in the depths of the dark lobby.
Except for Siromakha’s advice, Shikin would have called himself, and Ruska
would immediately have expected the worst, alerted a dozen friends, and
above all contrived to speak to Klara, find out what was wrong, and either
carry away ecstatic belief in her or be released from his commitment. There, at
the godfather’s door, realization came too late. Under the eyes of the institute’s
orderly officer, he ought not to hesitate; he could not turn back; he must not
arouse suspicion (if he was not already suspect). Ruska did nevertheless turn
around to hurry back downstairs, but the prison duty officer, Lieutenant
Zhvakun, the former executioner, summoned by telephone, was already on his
way up.
So Ruska went in to Shikin and took a few steps forward, bracing himself
and trying to look unconcerned. Drilled by two years under investigation and a
gambler of genius by nature, he stilled the storm within him and rapidly
switched his mind to new dangers. Looking boyishly guileless and eager to
please, he went in, saying, “May I? I’m at your service, Citizen Major.”
Shikin was sitting awkwardly, slumped forward against his desk, dangling
one arm and swinging it like a whip. He rose to meet Doronin, and the whip
arm swept upward to strike him in the face.
As the other arm swung back to strike, Doronin retreated toward the door
and prepared to defend himself. Blood was trickling from his mouth, and an
unruly lock of fair hair had fallen over one eye.
Too short to reach his face now, Shikin stood before him baring his teeth and
sputtering threats. “You dirty, rotten swine! Betray me, would you? Say goodbye
to life, you Judas! We’ll shoot you like a dog! Shoot you in a cellar!”
It was two and a half years since capital punishment had been abolished in
that most humane of countries. But neither the major nor his unmasked informer
cherished any illusions: What can you do with one who falls from favor . . .
except shoot him?
Ruska looked absurd, with his tousled hair and blood running down his chin
from a lip swelling as you watched.
Nevertheless, he straightened up and brazenly replied, “Shooting, now that
will need thinking about, Citizen Major. I’ll see you behind the wire as well.
You’ve been a general laughingstock for four months now, and you’re still
drawing your pay? They’ll tear those epaulets off you! But as for shooting, we
will have to wait and see.”