Chapter-09-The-Fifth-Year-in-Harness

THEYWERE SO carried away that they no longer heard the noise of the
laboratory and the tiresome radio in the far corner. Nerzhin on his revolving
chair had turned his back on the laboratory again. Rubin leaned sideways,
folded his hands on the back of his chair, and rested his beard on them.
Nerzhin spoke, evidently delivering thoughts long pondered.
“When I was outside and read what wise men had to say about the meaning
of life, or happiness, I always found it difficult to understand. I treated them
with respect: They were sages, doing what they were supposed to do. But the
meaning of life? We are alive, and that’s what it means. Happiness? When life
is very good to us, that’s happiness, everybody knows. . . . Prison has my
blessing! It’s made me think. To understand what happiness means, let us first
consider being full. Remember the Lubyanka or your time in
counterintelligence. Remember that thin, watery porridge of oats or barley,
without a single sparkle of fat. Do you just eat it? Just dine on it? No—it’s
Holy Communion! You receive it with awed reverence, as though it were the
life’s breath of the yogis! You eat it slowly, eat it from the tip of a wooden
spoon, eat it utterly absorbed in the process of eating, the thought of eating—
and the pleasurable feeling suffuses your whole body, like nectar; you are dizzy
with the sweetness which you discover in these mushy boiled grains and the
dishwater that holds them together. And—lo and behold!—you live six months,
live twelve months on a diet of next to nothing! Pigging out on choice chops
can’t compare!”
Rubin could not and never did listen for long. His idea of conversation (and
this was how it usually went) was to strew before his friends the intellectual
booty captured by his quick mind. As usual, he was eager to interrupt, but
Nerzhin gripped the front of his overalls with five fingers and shook him to
prevent him from speaking.
“So in our own wretched persons and from our unhappy comrades, we learn
what it means to eat our fill. It doesn’t depend on how much we eat, not at all,
but on how we eat! It’s the same with happiness, Lyovushka, it’s exactly the
same; it doesn’t depend at all on the size of the good things we’ve wrested
from life. It depends solely on our attitude to them! As the Taoist ethic has it:
‘He who knows how to be content will always be content.’ ”
Rubin laughed.
“You’re an eclectic. You pluck pretty feathers from every bird to beautify
your own tail!”
Nerzhin’s head and hand peremptorily denied it. His hair had slipped down
over his forehead. He found the argument very interesting, and he looked like a
boy of eighteen.
“Don’t try to confuse the issue, Lyovka, it isn’t like that at all! I draw my
conclusions not from the philosophical works I’ve read but from the life
stories I hear in prison. When I need to formulate my own views, why should I
set out to discover America all over again? There are no unexplored countries
on the planet Philosophy. I turn the pages of the wise men of old, and I find my
own most recent thoughts. Don’t interrupt! I was about to give you an example.
In the camp—and it’s even more true here in the sharashka—if a miracle
happens and I get a quiet Sunday off, and in the course of the day my soul
thaws out and is at ease, there may not have been any change for the better in
my objective situation, but the prison yoke lies more lightly on me. And then
suppose I have a really satisfying conversation or read an honest page—there I
am, on the crest of the wave! I’ve had no real life for many years, but I forget
it! I’m weightless, I’m suspended in space, I’m disembodied! I lie there on my
top bunk, I look at the ceiling just above me, it’s bare, the plaster’s peeling, but
I shudder with the sheer bliss of being! I fall asleep on the wings of happiness!
No president or prime minister can go to sleep as content with the Sunday
behind him!”
Rubin grinned good-naturedly. His grin expressed a measure of agreement
and a measure of indulgence for a deluded young friend.
“And what do the great books of the Vedas have to say on the subject?” he
asked, his lips protruding in a humorous funnel.
“The Vedas—I don’t know,” Nerzhin retorted, quite sure of himself. “But the
books of Sankhya say that ‘human happiness is ranked with suffering by the
discerning.’ ”
“I can see you’re an adept,” Rubin muttered into his beard.
“Adept in what? Idealism? Metaphysics? Why aren’t you sticking labels on
it?”
“Is it Mityai who’s leading you astray?”
“No, Mityai’s angle is quite different. Listen, shaggy beard! The happiness of
continual victory, the happiness of desire triumphantly gratified, the happiness
of total satisfaction . . . is suffering! It is the death of the soul; it is a sort of
permanent moral dyspepsia! Never mind the philosophers of the Vedas and the
Sankhya. I, Gleb Nerzhin, I myself, a prisoner in harness for five years, have
risen by my own efforts to a level of development at which the bad can also be
seen as the good, and it is my firm belief that people do not know themselves
what they should aspire to. They squander their strength in the pointless
scramble for a handful of material goods and die without even discovering
their own spiritual riches. When Lev Tolstoy dreamed of being put in prison,
he was thinking like a genuinely clear-sighted man with a healthy spiritual
life.”
Rubin guffawed. He always guffawed when he completely rejected the views
of his opponent in a debate (and that was his normal experience in prison).
“Harken, child! Your words come from an unformed youthful mind. You
prefer your own experience to the collective experience of mankind. You are
poisoned by the odors of the prison night bucket, and you expect to see the
world clearly through its exhalations. We ourselves have come to grief; our
own fate is all awry. But how can a man allow his convictions to be changed
or swayed one little bit just by that?”
“So you’re proud of your consistency?”
“I am! ‘Hier stehe ich und kann nicht anders.’ ”
“Of all the pigheadedness! That’s what I call metaphysics. Instead of learning
from prison, instead of absorbing this new life . . .”
“Absorbing what? The toxic bile secreted by life’s losers?”
“. . . you have willfully sealed your eyes, stopped your ears, adopted a pose
—and you think that shows intelligence? Is refusal to develop intelligent? You
struggle to believe in the triumph of your infernal Communism, but try as you
may, you don’t believe—”
“It isn’t a matter of belief, you dunderhead, but of scientific knowledge! And
objectivity!”
“What? You call yourself objective?”
“Ab-solutely!” Rubin said loftily.
“Never in my life have I known a more biased man than you!”
“Just try to rise above your own molehill! Try to look at things in historical
perspective! Historical necessity. Do you know the meaning of it? The
inevitability of conforming to the inherent laws of history. Everything goes the
way it must! Historical materialism could not cease to be true just because you
and I are in prison. Don’t root in the mud, just to grub up the moldering corpse
of skepticism.”
“Try to understand, Lev! It gave me no pleasure, it made me sick at heart to
part with that doctrine! It was the clarion call, the ruling passion of my youth; I
forsook and cursed all other things for its sake! Now I’m like a blade of grass
in the crater where a bomb has uprooted the tree of faith. I’ve lost so many
arguments since I’ve been in prison—”
“Because you weren’t clever enough, fathead.”
“—that I was bound in all honesty to jettison your rickety constructions and
look for others. It isn’t easy. My skepticism may be a shelter by the wayside, to
sit out the storm—”
“Bunk! Absolute garbage! You’ll never make a real skeptic! Skeptics are
supposed to suspend judgment, and you’re in a hurry to pronounce on
everything! Skeptics are supposed to cultivate ataraxia, imperturbability, and
you boil over at the slightest excuse!”
“Yes, you’re right.” Gleb buried his head in his hands. “I train my mind to
soar above it all . . . but the world around me makes me giddy, I lose control, I
snap at people, get indignant.”
“Above it all? And you’re at my throat because there’s a shortage of
drinkable water at Dzhezkazgan.”
“I would like to see you packed off to Dzhezkazgan! You might change your
tune there!”
“Fathead, idiot! You might at least try reading what great men have to say
about skepticism. Lenin, for instance.”
“Well? What about Lenin?” Nerzhin had lowered his voice.
“Lenin said: ‘To the paladins of liberal logorrhea à la russe, skepticism is a
stage on the way from democracy to vile lackey liberalism.’ ”
“What, what, what? Sure you aren’t misquoting?”
“His precise words. It’s from Remembering Herzen and it refers to . . .”
Nerzhin hid his head in his hands, as though conceding defeat.
“Well,” said Rubin mildly. “Satisfied?”
“Oh yes.” Nerzhin’s whole body rocked. “You couldn’t have found anything
better. To think that I once worshipped him!”
“What do you mean?”
“What do I mean? Is that the language of a great philosopher? That’s simply
the sort of wild abuse people go in for when they have no arguments! ‘Paladins
of logorrhea’! It makes you sick to say it. Liberalism means love of freedom,
so it has to be slavish and dirty. Whereas applause on command is a leap into
the realm of freedom, I suppose?”
In the heat of argument, the friends had forgotten the need for caution, and
their exclamations were now loud enough for Simochka to hear. She had been
darting glances of stern disapproval at Nerzhin for some time. The late shift
was drawing to an end, and she felt hurt that Nerzhin wasn’t taking advantage
of these convenient evening hours and hadn’t even looked around at her.
“No, your brain is simply out of kilter,” Rubin said in despair. “Can’t you put
it more clearly?”
“Well, it might make more sense this way: Skepticism is a way of silencing
fanaticism; skepticism is a way of liberating dogmatic minds.”
“And who’s the dogmatist here? Me, I suppose? Am I really a dogmatist?”
Rubin’s big warm eyes looked at him reproachfully. “I’m a prisoner, one of the
1945 intake, like you. I’ve got four years of war lodged like shrapnel in my
side and five years of prison around my neck, so I can see things just as clearly
as you. And if I was convinced that the whole thing was rotten to the core, I
would be the first to say we must publish another Kolokol! We must sound the
alarm! We must destroy! You wouldn’t find me hiding in the shrubbery, refusing
to pass judgment! Covering my nakedness with the fig leaf of skepticism! . . .
But I know that the decay is only apparent, only superficial, that the root is
sound, the stem is sound, so that we must come to the rescue, not destroy!”
The internal telephone rang on the vacant desk of Engineer Major Roitman,
head of the Acoustics Lab. Simochka rose and went over to it.
“Try to understand, try to get the iron law of our age into your head: There
are two worlds, two systems! And there is no third way! There can be no
Kolokol uselessly ringing into the wind. It’s impossible! You cannot avoid
choosing: Which of the two world forces are you for?”
“Be off with you! It just suits the Big Chief to reason that way. That ‘two
worlds’ nonsense has helped him to make doormats of us all.”
“Gleb Vikentich!”
“Listen to me now!” It was Rubin’s turn to seize Nerzhin by his overalls with
a commanding hand. “He is a very great man!”
“Blockhead! Hog’s brain!”
“One of these days you’ll understand! He is at once the Robespierre and the
Napoleon of our Revolution. He is . . . wise! He is truly wise! He sees further
than our blunted vision can reach—”
“And has the nerve to consider us all fools! He foists his ready-chewed cud
on us. . . .”
“Gleb Vikentich.”
“Eh?” Nerzhin came to himself and abandoned Rubin.
“Didn’t you hear? There was a phone call.” It was the third time Simochka
had called him, standing at her desk stern and frowning, her folded arms
drawing the brown mohair shawl tight around her shoulders. “Anton
Nikolaevich wants you in his office.”
“Oh?” The excitement of argument had faded from Nerzhin’s face, and the
wrinkles had returned. “Right, thank you, Serafima Vitalievna. Hear that,
Lyovka? Anton wants me. Wonder what for?”
A summons to the office of the director of the institute at ten o’clock on
Saturday evening was an extraordinary event. Although Simochka was trying to
look official and indifferent, Nerzhin could see that she was alarmed.
Their heated exchanges were forgotten. Rubin looked at his friend with
concern. When his eyes were not dilated by polemical passion, they were
almost feminine in their gentleness.
“I don’t like it when the top brass starts taking an interest in us,” he said.
Nerzhin shrugged. “Why worry? Ours is such an unimportant piffling little
job, all this voice business—”
“We will get it in the neck from Anton before long. We will live to regret
Stanislavsky’s memoirs and the speeches of famous lawyers!” said Rubin with
a laugh. “Maybe it’s Number Seven’s articulation tests?”
“The results have been signed already; there’s no going back on them.
Anyway, if I don’t come back—”
“Don’t be silly!”
“What’s silly about it? Life here is like that. But burn you-know-what.” Gleb
pulled down the rolltop quietly, put the keys in Rubin’s hand, and went off at
his usual leisurely pace. A prisoner five years between the shafts never
hurries. He knows that what comes next can only be worse.