Chapter-94-Always-Caught-Off-Guard

IN THE SPECIAL PRISON, too, it was time for breakfast and morning tea.
The day began with no warning that it was to be in any way special. It was
notable to begin with only for the captiousness of Lieutenant Shusterman; he
was getting ready to go off duty and did his best to prevent prisoners from
sleeping after reveille. The exercise period, too, went badly; an overnight frost
had followed yesterday’s thaw, and a thin crust of ice had formed on the welltrodden
paths. Many of the zeks emerged from their quarters, made one circuit,
slithering on the ice, and went back inside. In their cells, zeks sat on their
bunks, those up above with the legs tucked under them or dangling, none of
them in any hurry to get up, scratching their chests, yawning, making an early
start with the usual dreary jokes against one another or about their wretched
fate, and, of course, telling one another their dreams, a favorite prison pastime.
But although someone had dreamed of crossing a bridge over a turbid stream
and someone else of pulling on high boots, no one’s dream had foretold
transportation en masse.
Sologdin, as usual, went out early to chop wood. He had kept the window
ajar through the night, and he opened it wide before leaving for the woodpile.
Rubin, who lay with his head toward the same window, exchanged not a
single word with Sologdin. He had gone to bed late the night before, had again
been unable to sleep, and felt now a cold draft from the window, but not
wishing to interfere with the offender’s proceedings, he put on his fur cap with
earflaps and his padded jacket, lay curled up with his head under the covers,
did not get up for breakfast, and ignored the admonitions of Shusterman and the
general noise in the room, doing his best to prolong the hours of sleep.
Potapov was one of the first to rise. He had taken his walk, was among the
earliest breakfasters, had already drunk his tea and straightened his bed, and
was sitting reading the paper—but secretly longing to get to work (he was
going to calibrate an interesting apparatus that he had made himself).
Breakfast was millet mush. Many prisoners stayed away.
Gerasimovich, on the contrary, lingered in the dining room, slowly and
carefully inserting small quantities of gruel into his mouth. A casual onlooker
would never have taken him for the theorist of palace Revolution.
Nerzhin looked at him from the opposite corner of the half-empty dining
room and wondered whether he had given the right answer the night before. To
doubt is to be conscientious in the quest for knowledge; but was there a limit
beyond which the doubter should not retreat? If free speech ceased to exist
everywhere in the world, if the Times obediently reproduced Pravda, if the
natives on the Zambezi subscribed to the State Loan, if collective farmers on
the Loire bent their backs for kolkhoz wages, if Party hogs took their holidays
behind ten fences in the gardens of California, would life still be worth living?
How long could you shirk decisions with a “Don’t know”?
Nerzhin listlessly finished his breakfast and climbed into his upper bunk to
spend his last fifteen free minutes lying down and looking at the domed ceiling.
What had happened to Ruska was still the subject of discussion in the room.
He had not returned for the night and had obviously been arrested. Prison HQ
contained a small, dark cell, and he must have been locked up there.
They didn’t come straight out with it, didn’t openly call him a doublecrosser,
but that was what they implied. The gist of what they said was that
nothing could be tacked on to his sentence, but maybe they’d convert twentyfive
years of labor camp to twenty-five years’solitary (that year new prisons
were being built with single-prisoner cells, and solitary was becoming more
and more fashionable). Shikin, of course, could not be charging him with
double-dealing. But the charge brought against a man and his actual offense did
not necessarily coincide; if he was towheaded, you could accuse him of blackheadedness—and
give him just as long a sentence.
Gleb did not know how far things had gone between Ruska and Klara and
whether he ought to, or would have the courage to, comfort her. And if so—
how?
Rubin threw off his blanket and, to laughter all around, appeared in his fur
cap and padded jacket. Laughter at his own expense he never took amiss;
ridicule of socialism was what he could not stand. He removed his cap but
kept his jacket on and did not lower his feet to the floor to get dressed—there
was little point in it now that he had missed exercise, ablutions, and breakfast
—but asked someone to pour him a glass of tea and sat in bed, with his beard
disheveled, absently popping bits of buttered white bread into his mouth and
washing it down with the hot liquid, while with half-open eyes he lost himself
in Upton Sinclair’s novel, holding it with the same hand beside his glass. He
was in the blackest of moods.
Morning inspection was now in progress. The junior lieutenant was
deputizing. He counted heads while Shusterman made announcements. Entering
the semicircular room, Shusterman called out, as he had in the others before it:
“Attention! Prisoners are informed that after supper no one will be allowed
into the kitchen to get hot water; the duty officer must not be knocked for and
called out for this purpose.”
“Whose order is that?” Pryanchikov yelled furiously, jumping out of a cave
formed by placing two double bunks together.
“The commandant’s,” Shusterman answered importantly.
“When was it made?”
“Yesterday.”
Pryanchikov raised his skinny arms and brandished his fists above his head
as though calling heaven and earth to witness.
“That cannot be right!” he protested. “Last Saturday evening Minister
Abakumov in person promised me that there would be hot water at night! It
stands to reason. After all, we work till twelve at night!”
A peal of laughter from the prisoners was his answer.
“So don’t work till twelve, you prick,” Dvoetyosov boomed.
“We can’t employ a night cook,” Shusterman explained reasonably.
Then, taking the list from the hands of the junior lieutenant, he called out in
an overbearing voice that reduced them all to silence: “Attention! The
following will not report for work but will get themselves ready for
transportation. . . . From your room. Khorobrov! Mikhailov! Nerzhin!
Syomushkin! Have items of prison issue ready to hand in!”
With this, the inspection party left the room, leaving the four whose names
had been called out as if a tornado had caught them.
People abandoned their tea and bread and butter and hurriedly formed little
groups, some of them around those due to depart. Four out of twenty-five—an
unusually large cull. They all started talking at once, excited voices, lowered
voices, dismissively cheerful voices. Some of them stood upright on upper
bunks waving their arms, some clutched their heads, some held forth excitedly,
beating their breasts, some were already shaking the pillows out of their
pillowcases, and altogether the room presented such a chaotic medley of grief,
submissiveness, resentment, resolution, lamentation, and speculation—all of
this crammed into a confined space and on several different levels—that Rubin
rose from his bed just as he was, in his padded jacket and underpants, and
yelled: “A historic day for the special prison! Morning of the execution of the
streltsy!”
Spreading his arms out wide over the general scene.
His excitement certainly did not mean that he was happy to see men
transported. He would have found it just as funny if he had to leave himself. If
he saw a chance to make a joke, nothing was sacred.
TRANSPORTATION IS AN EVENT as momentous in the life of a prisoner as being
wounded is in the life of a soldier. And just as a wound may be light or
serious, curable or fatal, so transportation may be to somewhere close or
somewhere distant; it may be a diversion—and it may mean death.
When you read about the alleged horrors of penal servitude in tsarist times as
described by Dostoevsky, you are amazed to find how tranquilly men were
allowed to serve out their sentences! They could go for ten years without being
transported once!
A zek lives in one and the same place, gets used to his comrades, his work,
his masters. However unacquisitive he is, he inevitably accumulates
possessions; he finds himself the owner of a fiber suitcase sent from outside or
one made of plywood in the camp. He acquires a little frame in which he puts a
photograph of his wife or daughter, rag slippers that he puts on to walk about
the hut after work and hides from inspection during the daytime; he may even
have pinched an extra pair of cotton trousers or hung on to his old shoes
instead of handing them in, and all this moves from one hiding place to another
after every stocktaking. He even has his own needle, buttons sewn on securely,
and a couple more in reserve. There is usually tobacco in his pouch.
If he is a “square,” he will also have a supply of tooth powder and
occasionally clean his teeth. This prisoner accumulates a stack of letters from
his family and usually has a book of his own to exchange with others, so that he
gets to read every book in the camp.
But transportation strikes like a bolt from the blue to destroy his little life,
always without warning, always contrived to take the zek unawares and at the
last possible moment. Then letters from loved ones are torn up and dropped
into the hole of the latrine. And then the escort—if transportation is to be in red
cattle trucks—cuts off all the zek’s buttons and sprinkles his tobacco and tooth
powder on the breeze, since they might be used to blind one of the guards in the
course of the journey. If transportation is to be in locked passenger-train cars,
the escort guard stamps furiously on cases that refuse to go into the baggage
compartment, smashing the photograph frame while he is at it. In either case,
they take away the books (not allowed on the journey) and the needle, which
might be used to saw through bars and stab a guard; the rag slippers are thrown
away as trash, and the spare pair of breeches confiscated for general camp use.
And purged of the sin of property ownership, of his predilection for a settled
life, of his hankering after petit bourgeois comfort (justly stigmatized by
Chekhov all those years ago), deprived of his friends and his past, the zek puts
his hands behind his back and in columns of four (“One step to the right or one
step to the left and the escort guard opens fire without warning!”), surrounded
by dogs and guards, walks toward the car.
You have all seen him on our railroad stations at that moment but have
faintheartedly lowered your eyes in a hurry, loyally turned away, in case the
lieutenant in charge of the convoy suspects you of something and arrests you.
The zek enters the carriage or truck, and it is hitched on so that it stands
alongside a mail truck. Tightly caged in on all sides, invisible from the
platforms, he travels according to a leisurely timetable, carrying with him in
that airless confined space hundreds of memories, hopes, and apprehensions.
Where are they taking him? They aren’t saying. What awaits the prisoner in
his new place? The copper mines? A lumber camp? Or a coveted reassignment
to an agricultural working party where he may sometimes be lucky enough to
bake a potato and can eat his fill of the cattle’s turnips? Will the prisoner be
laid low by scurvy or malnutrition after one month on “general assignment”?
Or will he be lucky enough to grease a palm or meet somebody he knows and
latch on to a barracks orderly’s or hospital orderly’s or even storeroom
assistant’s job? And will they allow him to write and receive letters in his new
place? Or will his letters be intercepted year after year, until his loved ones
write him off as dead?
But perhaps he won’t even reach his appointed destination? Perhaps he will
die in the cattle wagon? Of dysentery? Or because they are kept on the move
for six days without bread? Or perhaps the guards will beat him to death with
hammers because someone else has made his escape? Or maybe at the end of
the journey in a freight car with an unheated stove, the zeks will be frozen stiff
and their bodies slung out like so much firewood?
It takes the red trains a month to reach Sovgavan.
Remember, O Lord, those who did not arrive!
THOSE LEAVING WERE TREATED LENIENTLY, even allowed to keep their razors
as far as the first prison, but all these questions tormented the twenty prisoners
detailed for transportation during the Tuesday morning room inspection.
For them, the untroubled, half-free life of the special prison was over.