Chapter-78-The-Professional-Party-Secretary

IN THE EARLYDAYS OF MARFINO, their trade union had great moral
significance in the lives of the institute’s free employees.
Everyone knows that a trade union could be a key factor in socialist
production. It alone could selflessly request the government to make the
working day and the working week longer, to raise production norms and
lower wages.
If people in towns had nothing to eat or nowhere to live (or, as so often,
neither of those things), the trade union—who else?—would come to the
rescue, authorizing its members to cultivate collective holdings on their days
off and build houses for the state in their leisure hours. The trade unions were
the foundation on which all the conquests of the Revolution, and the everfirmer
position of the boss class, rested.
A general meeting of trade-union members was the best place to demand the
dismissal of a fellow worker guilty of complaining or demanding his rights, if
the management dared not dismiss him otherwise. When work property was
written off as of no further use to the state but was still usable by the director
on the domestic level, no signature could look so spotlessly pure on the
necessary document as that of the local TU secretary. Moreover, the trade
unions paid for themselves, with the thirtieth percentage point that the state
could not very well withhold from the worker’s wage in addition to the 29
percent deducted to cover tax and a “voluntary” contribution to the State Loan.
In matters great and small, the trade unions became, day in and day out, a
veritable school of Communism.
In spite of which the Marfino Institute’s trade union was suppressed. A highly
placed comrade in the Moscow City Party Committee had gotten wind of its
existence and been horrified: “What are you thinking of?!” he had gasped,
without even adding the word “comrades.” “This smacks of Trotskyism!
Marfino is a military establishment; what’s it doing with a trade union?”
The union was abolished the very same day.
Life at Marfino was not, however, shaken to its foundations. The only result
was that the importance of the Party organization, not inconsiderable before,
grew and grew. The Oblast Committee of the Party recognized Marfino’s need
for a full-time Party secretary. After scrutinizing a number of dossiers
submitted by the Personnel Department, the bureau decided to recommend
Stepanov, Boris Sergeevich, born 1900, native of the village of
Lupachi, rural district of Bobrovsk. Social origin—family of farm
laborers, after the Revolution village policeman, no professional
qualifications. Present social position—of ice worker. Education—four
years elementary school plus two-year training school. Party member
from 1921, engaged in Party work from 1923, no deviations from the
Party line, took no part in opposition groups, has not served in armed
forces or institutions of White government, has not lived under enemy
occupation, has not been abroad, knows no languages, does not know the
languages of any non-Russian peoples of the USSR, suf ers from shellshock,
has Order of Red Banner and medal “For Victory over Germany
in the Fatherland War.”
When the Obkom made its recommendation, Stepanov was away in the
Volokolamsk district, engaged as an agitator in the harvest campaign. If the
collective farmers sat down to eat or simply for a smoke, he took advantage of
every leisure minute to make them gather around, or in the evenings summoned
them to the kolkhoz office, so that he could tirelessly explain, in the light of the
world-conquering doctrine of Marx-Engels-Lenin-Stalin, how important it was
that the land should be sown every year with good-quality seed, that the yield
should be as much in excess of the seed sown as possible, and that the crop
should be harvested without wastage or pilfering and handed over with all
possible speed to the state. Forgoing rest, he moved on to the tractor drivers
and explained to them, in the light of the same immortal doctrine, the
importance of economizing on fuel, the need to take good care of equipment,
the utter inadmissibility of standstills. He also, reluctantly, answered questions
about poor maintenance work and the unavailability of overalls.
Meanwhile, a general meeting of the Marfino Party organization had
enthusiastically accepted the recommendation of the Obkom and elected
Stepanov, sight unseen, full-time secretary. A co-op official in the Yegorov
district, relieved of his post for embezzlement, was sent to agitate in
Volokolamsk, while in Marfino an office next to that of the secret operations
officer was fitted out for Stepanov, and he assumed control.
He began by formally taking over from his part-time predecessor, Lieutenant
Klykachev. Klykachev was as lean as a wolfhound, quick on his feet, and
tireless. He ran the code-cracking lab, supervised the cryptographic and
statistical groups, presided over the Komsomol seminar, was the moving spirit
of the “youth group,” and had still found time to act as secretary to the Party
Committee. And although his superiors considered Klykachev rigorous, while
his subordinates called him a nitpicker, the new secretary at once suspected
that Party business in the Marfino Institute had been neglected. For Party work
demands the whole man, with nothing left over for other activities.
It was as he had expected. The takeover occupied a whole week, during
which Stepanov did not once leave his office.
He perused every document in the place and got to know every Party
member, from his or her dossier first and only then in the flesh. The new
secretary’s hand weighed heavily on Klykachev.
One dereliction after another came to light: unanswered questionnaires,
defective personal files, failure to provide detailed assessments of the
character and performance of each member and candidate member. The same
fatal flaw vitiated all of the previous secretary’s initiatives: Nothing that he
undertook was adequately documented, and so those activities themselves
appeared spectral.
“Who’s going to believe it? Who’s going to take your word for it that these
measures really were implemented?” Stepanov exclaimed, holding a smoking
cigarette above his bald head.
He explained patiently that Klykachev’s activities existed only on paper
(since his word was the only evidence for them!) and not in reality (meaning
not on paper, not in the form of official reports!).
Who cares, for instance, whether or not the institute’s physiculturists (he was
talking about prisoners, of course) play enthusiastic volleyball in the lunch
hour (and even make a habit of running over into working time)? Maybe they
do. Neither you nor I nor anybody else will be going down to the yard to see
whether the ball really is in the air. But if they’ve played so often and
accumulated so much experience, shouldn’t they share it with others in a
special physical-culture wall newspaper called, say, Red Ball? If Klykachev
then took the paper down regularly and filed it in Party records, no inspection
team could doubt for a moment that “Operation Volleyball” was a reality
carried out under Party supervision. As things were, who would take
Klykachev’s word for it?
And so it went on and on. “You can’t file the spoken word” was the profound
dictum with which Stepanov took up his duties.
A Catholic priest would not believe that anyone could lie in the confessional,
and it would never enter Stepanov’s head that lies can be told even in written
records.
Skinny Klykachev, with his chronic wheeze, did not argue with Stepanov but
feigned grateful agreement and followed his example. While Stepanov soon
softened toward Klykachev, thus demonstrating that there was no malice in
him, he listened intently to Klykachev’s misgivings about Engineer Colonel
Yakonov: Should an important research institute have at its head someone with
such a dubious record, someone who was quite simply “not one of us”?
Stepanov was already very much on his guard. He now made Klykachev his
right-hand man, told him to drop in at the Party office whenever he felt like it,
and good-naturedly shared with him the treasures of his own Party experience.
So Klykachev got to know the new Party organizer sooner and better than
anyone. “The young” adopted his sarcastic nickname for Stepanov: “the
Shepherd.” But it was thanks to Klykachev that relations between Stepanov
and “the young” were not as bad as they might have been. “The young” were
quick to realize that it made life much easier if the Party organizer was
obviously not their man but an impartial stickler for rules and regulations.
And what a stickler Stepanov was! Tell him that someone was to be pitied,
that someone should be spared the full rigor of the law and shown clemency,
and his brow, loftier since his hair had receded, would crease in pain and his
shoulders slump as if an additional burden had been laid on them. Until, fired
by the ardor of his faith, he found the strength to rise to his full height and turn
on interlocutors right and left so sharply that little white squares, reflections of
the windows, flashed in the leaden lenses of his spectacles.
“Comrades! Comrades! What is this I hear? How can you talk that way?
Remember! You must uphold the law at all times! Uphold the law, however
hard you find it! Uphold the law with all your might! Only thus, only in this
way, can you really help the person for whose sake you came close to breaking
the law! Because the law is devised to serve society and mankind, though we
often fail to realize this and in our own blindness seek to circumvent the law!”
Stepanov, for his part, was pleased with “the young,” who showed a taste for
Party meetings and Party criticism. He saw in them the nucleus of a sound
collective, such as he always tried to create at each new place of work. The
collective that failed to expose lawbreakers in its midst, the collective that sat
mum through meetings, was a collective that Stepanov rightly considered
unsound. Whereas if a collective, to a man, fell upon one of its members, the
very one at whom the Party Committee had pointed a finger, that collective was
in the eyes of Stepanov, and those above him, a sound one.
Stepanov had many similar ideas, so firmly fixed in his mind that any
departure from them was impossible. He could not, for instance, imagine a
meeting that did not end with a tumultuous resolution castigating individual
members and mobilizing the collective as a whole to break production records.
He was particularly fond of “open” Party meetings, which non-Party people
also attended on a “voluntary-compulsory” basis, only to be torn to shreds with
no right to defend themselves or to vote. If before the vote was taken, pained or
even indignant voices were heard asking, “What is this? A Party meeting? Or a
criminal court?” Stepanov would peremptorily interrupt whoever was
speaking, even the chairman; sprinkling a sedative powder on his tongue with a
shaky hand (since his shell-shock, excitement made his head ache, and he
always got agitated when the Party’s infallibility was under attack), he would
walk into the middle of the room, directly under the ceiling lights, so that the
large beads of sweat on his bald brow stood out, and say, “Are we to take it,
then, that you are against criticism and self-criticism?” Then, emphatically
flourishing his clenched fist as if hammering his thoughts into the heads of his
listeners, he would explain that “self-criticism is the supreme dynamic law of
Soviet society, the main engine of its progress! It is time you understood that
when we criticize members of our collective, it is not with a view to putting
them on trial, but to keep every member of staff in a state of creative tension
every minute of the day! About this there cannot be two opinions, Comrades!
Of course, not every kind of criticism is needed! What we need is businesslike
criticism, meaning criticism that is not directed at tried and tested leading
cadres! We must not confuse freedom to criticize with the freedom of petit
bourgeois anarchism!”
With which he withdrew to the carafe and washed down another powder
with a swig of water.
Thus was the triumph of the Party’s general line ensured. And the result was
always that a sound collective, including members scourged and crushed by the
resolution (condemning their “criminally slack attitude to their work” and their
“failure to meet completion dates, bordering on sabotage”), unanimously voted
for it.
It sometimes happened that Stepanov, though so fond of extended and closely
argued resolutions and though happily aware in advance of the line that
speakers could be expected to take and the final verdict of the meeting, was
short of time to draft a resolution in full beforehand. On such occasions, when
the chairman called on Comrade Stepanov to present the draft resolution, he
would mop his brow and bald patch and speak as follows:
“Comrades! I have been very busy and have not had time to check certain
circumstances, names, and facts. . . .”
Or: “Comrades! The directorate sent for me today, and I have not yet been
able to draft a resolution.”
In either case, he would add: “ I ask you therefore to vote on a resolution in
general terms, and I will attend to the details tomorrow, when I have time.”
And the Marfino collective proved its soundness by raising its hands without
a murmur, although it did not know (and did not ask) who exactly was to be
lashed and who lauded in that resolution.
The new Party organizer’s position was further reinforced by his avoidance
of intimate relationships. Everyone addressed him respectfully as “Boris
Sergeich.” He accepted this as his due but did not himself call anyone at the
site by his first name and patronymic. Even in the heat of a desktop billiards
match (the green baize was always in evidence in the Party Committee’s
room), he would exclaim, “Put the balls up, Comrade Shikin!” or “Off the rail,
Comrade Klykachev!”
Stepanov did not much like people appealing to his better nature. He himself
never appealed to anyone’s finer feelings. So that the moment he sensed
dissatisfaction in the collective or resistance to his initiatives, instead of loud
remonstrances or quiet permission, he took a large sheet of blank paper, wrote
at the top in bold letters, “The below-mentioned comrades are required by
such and such a date to . . .” do this, that, and the other, then ruled columns for
“recipient’s name,” “serial number,” and “acknowledgment of receipt” and
handed it to his secretary to take around. The comrades indicated read it,
sputtered their fury over an impervious sheet of paper, and had no choice but to
sign and, having signed, to do as they were bidden.
Stepanov’s “release” from other duties was also release from wandering in
the dark. The radio had only to announce that heroic Yugoslavia no longer
existed, only the Tito clique, and within five minutes Stepanov would be
explaining the Comintern resolution as cogently and confidently as if he
personally had been pondering it for years. If anyone timidly called Stepanov’s
attention to a contradiction between yesterday’s and today’s instructions, to
gaps in the institute’s equipment, to the inferiority of Soviet apparatus, to
difficulties with living accommodations, the “liberated” Stepanov simply
smiled and his glasses gleamed because whoever it was must surely know
what he was about to say: “Well, what can we do about it, Comrades? It’s a
departmental muddle. But progress is undoubtedly being made, with this
problem as with others. You won’t deny that, I’m sure!”
Stepanov did have certain human weaknesses, though not very important
ones. He liked being praised by his superiors, for instance, and being admired
by ordinary Party members as an experienced leader. He enjoyed these tributes
because they were no more than his due.
He was also fond of vodka, but only if someone treated him or if it were
served at a banquet, and he invariably complained, as he drank, that vodka was
murder to one in his state of health. Which was why he never bought it himself
or treated anyone else.
These were perhaps his only faults.
“The young” sometimes argued among themselves as to how “the Shepherd”
should best be described. “My friends!” Roitman said, “he is the prophet of the
bottomless inkwell. He is the soul of the rubber-stamped document. Such
people are an inevitable feature of the transition period.”
But Klykachev bared his teeth in a grin and said, “Simpletons! If we get
within biting distance, he’ll gobble us up, shit and all. Don’t think he’s stupid.
He’s learned what it’s all about in his fifty years. Why d’you think every
meeting adopts a motion tearing someone to pieces? He’s waiting for the
history of Marfino, that’s why! He’s storing up scraps of evidence just in case.
Whatever turn things take, any inspection team will be convinced that the fulltime
secretary gave repeated warnings and did his best to alert the public.”
The treacherous Klykachev depicted Stepanov as a devious intriguer, who
would stop at nothing to give his three sons a good start in life.
Stepanov did indeed have three sons, who were forever asking their father
for money. He had steered all three toward the History Department, knowing
that for Marxists history is not a difficult discipline. His calculation looked
sound enough, but he (like the state’s general education plan) had failed to
allow for a sudden glut of Marxist historians: Supply greatly exceeded demand
from schools, colleges, crash courses; exceeded demand in Moscow itself;
then throughout the Moscow oblast; and finally everywhere this side of the
Urals. When the first son graduated, instead of staying at home to support his
parents, he left for far-off Khanty-Mansiisk. The second son was offered a post
in Mongolia, and it seemed doubtful whether when the third son finished his
studies, he would find anything nearer than the island of Borneo.
Their father clung all the more tenaciously to his job and his little house on
the outskirts of Moscow with his 0.12 hectares of garden, his barrels of
sauerkraut, and his two or three porkers. For Stepanov’s wife, a stolid person,
perhaps a little out of step with the times, fattening those pigs was her main
interest in life, as well as a prop for the family budget. Sunday was the day she
had chosen for a trip to town with her husband in order to buy a piglet. This
operation (successfully accomplished) was why Stepanov had not come to
work that day, although Saturday’s interview had left him ill at ease and
impatient to be back at Marfino.
That Saturday, in the Political Department, Stepanov had been given a shock.
An official person, a very important one, round and rosy—there were roughly
280 pounds of him—in spite of the cares of office, had glanced at the
spectacles mounted on Stepanov’s narrow nose and asked in a baritone drawl,
“Ah, Stepanov, what are you doing about the Hebrews?”
Stepanov pricked up his ears, unsure that he had heard correctly.
“The Jews!” And (seeing that the other man still did not understand)—“the
Yids, then.”
Caught off balance and not daring to repeat that double-edged word, which
not so long ago could earn you twenty years for anti-Soviet agitation and at one
time get you put against a wall, Stepanov mumbled, “. . . Er . . . well. . . .”
“Well, what are you thinking of doing about them?”
But then the telephone rang, the important senior comrade lifted the receiver,
and their conversation was at an end.
Stepanov anxiously read through a whole bundle of directives, instructions,
and guidelines there in the department, but the black letters on white paper
carefully skirted the Jewish problem.
All that Sunday, as they went to buy the pig, he thought and thought and
clawed his chest in despair. Age had evidently dulled his wits. What a
disgrace! An experienced Party worker like Stepanov fails to spot a major
campaign in the making and even finds himself indirectly implicated in the
intrigues of the enemy because that whole Roitman-Klykachev group. . . .
Stepanov arrived at work on Monday morning not knowing what to think.
After Shikin had said no to a game of billiards (Stepanov had planned to pump
him), the full-time secretary, suffocating for want of instructions, locked
himself in the Party Committee quarters and banged the balls around for two
hours on end, occasionally jumping one of them off the table. The enormous
bronze bas-relief on the wall—the heads of the Four Founding Fathers
superimposed in profile—witnessed several brilliant shots with two or all
three balls pocketed at once. But the silhouettes in bas-relief maintained their
bronze impassivity. Three of the four each studied the nape of the genius in
front, and not one of them suggested how Stepanov could avoid destroying a
healthy collective and even reinforce it in the new situation.
Exhausted, he heard the telephone ring at last and pounced on the receiver.
The message was, first, that instead of the usual Party and Komsomol
instruction classes that evening, he should assemble everybody for a lecture on
“Dialectical Materialism: The Progressive Worldview,” to be given by a
lecturer from the Oblast Committee. And, second, that a car was even then on
its way to Marfino, with two comrades who would provide the appropriate
guidelines for the campaign against kowtowing to foreign countries.
The full-time secretary took heart, cheered up, doubled a ball into a pocket,
and hid the billiards table behind the room divider.
His spirits were further raised by the thought that the pink-eared piglet
bought yesterday had eaten its swill eagerly, turning up its nose at nothing, both
the night before and again that morning. There was reason to hope that it would
fatten up quickly and cheaply.