Chapter-66-Going-to-the-People

RUBIN AND SOLOGDIN indulgently referred to Nerzhin’s friendship with the
yardman, Spiridon, as his “going to the people,” in quest of that great
homespun truth Gogol, Nekrasov, Herzen, the Slavophiles, Lev Tolstoy, and
finally the much-maligned Vasisuali Lokhankin had sought in vain before him.
Whereas Rubin and Sologdin themselves had never sought that homespun
truth, because each of them possessed the ultimate truth, crystal clear and his
very own.
Rubin knew for certain that “the people” is an artificial generalization, that
every people is divided into classes, and that even they change as time goes by.
Seeking a superior understanding of life in the peasant class was unimaginative
and futile. The proletariat was the only consistently and thoroughly
Revolutionary class, the future belonged to the proletariat, and only the
collectivism and selflessness of the proletariat gave life a higher meaning.
Sologdin was no less certain that “the people” is the formless raw material
of history, from which the sturdy, crude, but indispensable legs of that Colossus
—the Spirit of Man—are molded. “The people” was a collective term for the
totality of crude and faceless creatures hopelessly straining in the harness to
which they were born and from which death alone would release them. Only
rare individuals scattered like brilliant stars around the dark sky of existence
were endowed with superior insight.
They both knew that Nerzhin would get over it, grow up a bit, come to his
senses.
Nerzhin had indeed already outgrown many of his wilder ideas.
Nineteenth-century Russian literature, so full of heartache for “our suffering
brothers,” had left him, as it leaves all who read it for the first time, with an
image of “the People”—personified as a gray-haired saintly figure with a halo,
in a silver frame, uniting in itself wisdom, moral purity, and spiritual greatness.
But the place for that image was the bookshelf—or that long-lost world, the
fields and byways of the nineteenth century.
Russia in fact no longer existed—only the Soviet Union, and in it the big city
in which Gleb had grown up. Success upon success had rained on young Gleb
from the cornucopia of learning. He had discovered that he was a quick
thinker, but there were others who thought even quicker and who overwhelmed
him with their knowledge. “The People” stayed on his bookshelf, but in his
mind the only people who mattered were those who carried in their heads the
cultural treasures of the world—encyclopedic connoisseurs of antiquity and
the fine arts, people of wide and varied erudition. He had to belong to this
elite. Failure to win acceptance meant a life of misery.
Then the war came, and Nerzhin found himself serving in a horse-drawn
transport unit. Choking with the indignity of it, he clumsily chased horses
around the pasture, trying to throw a halter around their necks or jump on their
backs. He had never learned to ride, he couldn’t handle a harness, he couldn’t
fork hay, and a nail would bend double under his hammer, as though deriding
this unskillful workman! The worse things went for Nerzhin, the more
raucously those around him—the unshaved, foulmouthed, pitiless, utterly
unlikable people—guffawed.
In time, Nerzhin made his way up from the ranks and became an artillery
officer. Youthful and nimble again, he walked around smartly belted, elegantly
flourishing a pliant twig broken off for the purpose—he carried nothing else.
He rode daringly on the footboards of trucks, swore roundly at river
crossings, was ever ready to move out at midnight and in foul weather, and had
behind him—obedient, devoted, eager to serve, and therefore decidedly
likable—the People. And his own small sample of the people listened readily,
or so it seemed, to his pep talks about the great People that had risen as one
man to defend its country.
Then Nerzhin was arrested. In his first prisons, under investigation or
awaiting transfer, and in the first camps, which had stunned and numbed him,
he was horrified to discover that some of the elite had another side to them: In
circumstances in which only firmness, willpower, and loyalty to friends
showed the true worth of a prisoner and determined the fate of his comrades,
these refined and sensitive and highly educated connoisseurs of the exquisite
rather often turned out to be cowards, quick to surrender, and, thanks to their
education, disgustingly ingenious in justifying their dirty tricks. Such people
quickly degenerated into traitors and toadies. Nerzhin came to see himself as
not so very different from them. He recoiled from those with whom he had
once proudly identified. He began to loathe and to ridicule things he had
revered. His aim now was to become ordinary, to shed the affectations—the
exaggerated politeness, the preciosity—of the intellectuals. In the years of
unrelieved disaster, in the worst moments of his shattered life, Nerzhin decided
that the only valuable, the only important people were those who worked with
their hands, planing timber, shaping metal, tilling the soil, smelting iron. He
tried now to learn from simple laboring people the wisdom of their infinitely
skillful hands and their philosophy of life. So Nerzhin had come full circle and
arrived at the idea so fashionable in the nineteenth century, that of “going to”—
going down to—“the people.”
But the circle was not quite a closed one; it ended in a spiraling tail
unimaginable to our grandfathers. Unlike the educated gentlefolk of the
nineteenth century, the zek Nerzhin could descend without dressing up in
strange clothes and feeling with his foot for the ladder; he was simply slung
bodily into the mass of the people, in ragged padded trousers and a patched
tunic, and given a daily work quota. Nerzhin shared the lot of simple people
not as a condescending gentleman, always conscious of the difference and so
always alien, but as one of themselves, indistinguishable from them, an equal
among equals.
It was not to ingratiate himself with the muzhik but to earn a soggy hunk of
bread for the day that Nerzhin had to learn to pound nails in straight and plane
planks so that they fitted perfectly. After his cruel training in the camps, another
of Nerzhin’s misconceptions fell away. He realized that he could lower himself
no further. There was nothing, and no one, down there. He was cured, too, of
his illusion that the People, with their age-old homespun wisdom, were
superior to himself. Squatting with them in the snow at their escort’s command,
hiding with them from the foreman in the dark corners of a building site,
heaving handbarrows over freezing ground, and drying his foot rags in the huts
with them, Nerzhin saw clearly that these people were in no way his betters.
Their endurance of hunger and thirst was no greater than his. They were no
more stouthearted than he was, faced with the stone wall of a ten-year
sentence. No more farsighted and no more resourceful at critical moments, in
transit from prison to camp or during body searches. They were, though, more
gullible and more easily deceived by stool pigeons. They fell more readily for
the crude deceptions of the authorities. They looked forward to an amnesty,
though Stalin would sooner turn up his toes than grant it. If some thug of a
guard happened to be in a good mood and smiled at them, they hastened to
smile back. They were also much greedier for trivial favors: a
“supplementary,” a hundred grams of rancid lard cake, a pair of hideous prison
trousers, just as long as they were newish or a bit flashy.
Most of them lacked a “point of view” of the sort that a man treasures more
than life itself.
All that was left to him, Nerzhin decided, was to be himself.
Once he had recovered—perhaps finally, perhaps not—from this last of
many infatuations, Nerzhin saw the People differently. None of his books had
prepared him for his new insight. “The People” did not mean all those who
speak your language, nor yet the chosen few branded with the fiery mark of
genius. Neither birth nor the labor of your hands nor the privileges of education
admit you to membership of the People.
Only your soul can do that.
And each of us fashions his soul himself, year in and year out.
You must strive to temper and to cut and polish your soul so as to become a
human being. And hence a humble component of your people.
A man with such a soul cannot as a rule expect to prosper, to go far in his
career, to get rich. Which is why for the most part “the People” is not to be
found at the higher levels of society.