Chapter-60-But-We-Are-Given-Only-One-Conscience,-Too

WHILE THIS STORYWAS BEING TOLD, Shchagov had put a high gloss on his
well-worn but still respectable calfskin boots, donned what had been his dress
uniform, after cleaning and pinning on his medals and sewing the wound
stripes on his sleeve (army uniform, alas, was becoming fatally unfashionable
in Moscow, and Shchagov would soon have to join in the desperate scramble
for suits and shoes), and set out for the Kaluga Gate on the other side of
Moscow. He had been invited, through his army friend Erik SaunkinGolovanov,
to a party at the home of Public Prosecutor Makarygin.
The party was mainly for the young, but it was also a family occasion to
celebrate the award of the Red Banner of Labor to the public prosecutor. Some
of the young people present were not, in fact, very close connections, but
Daddy was footing the bill. The girl whom Shchagov had described to Nadya
as his fiancée was sure to be there. There was, in fact, nothing definite
between them, and it was time for him to press harder. That was why he had
called Erik and asked him to arrange an invitation.
With a few opening remarks in readiness, he climbed the stairs (where Klara
was always reminded of the woman she had seen cleaning them) and entered
the apartment in which four years earlier the man whose wife he had just
nearly stolen had crawled on his knees in ragged quilted trousers laying the
parquet floor.
Apart from tightening his hold on his intended, what Shchagov most devoutly
hoped to get from that evening was his fill of appetizing food. He knew that the
best of everything would be provided in unsinkable quantities. He also knew
that guests at such feasts were doomed to behave as though they were there
simply to amuse one another, feigning indifference to food and barring the way
to it. Shchagov must continue to entertain his opposite number, exchanging
jokes and smiling politely, while appeasing his stomach, which was shriveling,
thanks to the student refectory.
He did not expect to see a single genuine soldier at the party, anyone who
like himself had threaded his way through mine lanes and stumbled wearily
over plowed fields in what was grandiosely called an attack. His comrades
were scattered, lost forever, killed in the hemp fields outside some village or
against the wall of a barn or on an assault craft . . . and he was entering this
warm and comfortable world alone, not to ask, “Where were you, you
bastards?” but to become one of them and to eat his fill.
Perhaps his habit of dividing people into soldiers and nonsoldiers no longer
made sense? Some people found it embarrassing to wear even the combat
medals that had once cost them so dearly and shone so brightly. You couldn’t
accost everybody and ask “Where were you then?” It made less and less
difference whether a man had fought or dodged the draft. There is a time to
remember and a time to forget. Life is for the living. The dead have their glory.
Shchagov pressed the bell. The girl who opened the door was presumably
Klara.
There were already quite a few coats, men’s and women’s, hanging in the
little lobby. The warm party atmosphere reached him there—the cheerful buzz
of voices, music from a record player, the clatter of crockery, a medley of
joyous smells from the kitchen.
The telephone rang out there in the lobby, and Klara lifted the receiver,
urging Shchagov with her left hand to take his coat off.
“Ink? Hello. What? You haven’t left yet? . . . This very minute! . . . Ink, you
know Daddy will be offended. Even your voice sounds feeble. . . . Oh well, if
all you can say is ‘I just can’t!’ Hang on, then, I’ll call Nara.”
“Nara!” she shouted into the next room. “Your ever-loving is on the line.
Come and speak to him.” (To Shchagov.) “Take your coat off.” (He already
had.) “And your galoshes.” (He wasn’t wearing them.) (To Nara.) “Know
what? He doesn’t want to come.”
Wafting perfume from some exotic clime, Klara’s sister Dotnara came into
the lobby. Shchagov knew from Golovanov that she was married to a diplomat.
She was strikingly handsome rather than beautiful, and she moved with the
graceful ease that is the glory of Russian womanhood.
She took the receiver and began talking affectionately to her husband. She
was in Shchagov’s way, but he felt no need to hurry past this fragrant obstacle.
He stood looking at her. Padded shoulders were very much in fashion, but
Dotnara looked all the more feminine for refusing to hide the delicate curve of
her upper arm. There was something else unusual about her dress. She was
wearing a sleeveless dress but over it a fur-trimmed jacket with slit sleeves
gathered at the wrist.
Not one of the three standing so awkwardly close together in the cozily
carpeted lobby could have imagined that disaster lurked in that innocent, shiny
black tube and that trivial discussion about coming or not coming to a party.
That afternoon Rubin had ordered additional recordings of calls made by
each of the suspects. This was the first time Volodin had answered his
telephone since then. As he raised the receiver, a tape in the central exchange
of the Ministry of State Security began rustling and recording—the voice of
Innokenty Volodin.
As a precaution he had decided not to use the phone for the present. But his
wife had gone out, leaving a note; he was to be at his father-in-law’s that
evening without fail.
He was calling now to beg off.
After yesterday’s call to the embassy—was it really only yesterday? it
seemed ages ago—the suspense had become harder and harder to bear. He had
not expected to be so agitated, never imagined that he could be so afraid for
himself. He was seized by dread in the night, certain that he was about to be
arrested. He longed for morning to come, so that he could leave the house. He
had spent the whole day in a state of restless anxiety, understanding nothing of
what was said to him and not even listening. Regret for his impulse was
compounded by craven terror, but by evening those feelings had degenerated
into apathy; he no longer cared what happened.
It would probably have been easier for Innokenty if that interminable day had
not been a Sunday. He would have been in the office, looking for clues as to
whether his posting to the UN in New York was going ahead or had been
canceled. But on Sunday there was no way of guessing whether the holiday lull
held peace or menace.
Throughout the last twenty-four hours, his call to the embassy had seemed to
him suicidally rash. Nor could it possibly do any good. And anyway, to judge
by that dithering idiot of an attaché, they were not worth defending.
There was nothing to show that he had been found out, but his heart ached
with an inexplicable presentiment, and the anticipation of disaster grew
stronger and stronger. The last thing he wanted was to go where people were
enjoying themselves. He was trying to persuade his wife, speaking hesitantly,
as people do when they have something unpleasant to say. His wife persisted,
and the peculiarities of his “individual speech pattern” were recorded on a
narrow strip of magnetic tape, to be turned into the “sound pictures” on wet
film that would be laid out before Rubin the next morning.
Dotty was not talking in the peremptory tone she had adopted in recent
months. Softened, perhaps, by the weariness in her husband’s voice, she
begged him to come, if only for an hour.
Innokenty gave in.
But when he put down the receiver, his hand remained on it, and he stood
motionless, as though letting his fingerprints be taken. He felt that he had left
something unsaid.
He suddenly felt sorry not for the wife with whom he had lived and lived no
longer, and whom he meant to leave forever in a few days’ time, but for the
fair-haired tenth-grade schoolgirl, with curls down to her shoulders, whom he
used to take dancing between the tables at the Metropole, the girl with whom
long ago he had begun to discover what life was about. Their passion was
fierce, impervious to reason, and they refused to hear about waiting a year
before they married. Innokenty’s mother, already seriously ill, was against it,
but what mother does not oppose her son’s choice? So was the public
prosecutor, but what father lightheartedly surrenders a charming eighteen-yearold
daughter? But against all opposition, the young people got married, and
their unclouded happiness was a byword among their common acquaintances.
Their married life began with the very best auguries. People in their social
circle did not know what it meant to go anywhere on foot or to use the metro.
Even before the war they preferred flying to a sleeper on an express train.
They never had to worry about furnishing an apartment; wherever the young
couple went—in the countryside around Moscow, in Tehran, on the Syrian
coast, in Switzerland—a fully equipped dacha, villa, or flat would be waiting
for them. Their outlook on life was identical. No inhibitions, no obstacles must
come between wish and fulfillment. “We are people who behave naturally,”
Dotnara used to say. “We don’t pretend; we wear no disguise. Whatever we
want we go all out for!” As they saw it, “We are given only one life”—and so
must take from life all that it has to offer. But not, perhaps, a child, because a
child is an idol that sucks the vital juices out of you and repays you with no
sacrifice of its own, not even with gratitude.
With views such as these, they were well suited to their milieu, and it was
well suited to them. They were eager to sample every new, exotic fruit. To
learn the taste of every rare brandy and what distinguished the wines of the
Rhone from those of Corsica and of all the earth’s vineyards besides. To wear
every kind of clothing. Dance every dance. Swim at every resort. Sit through
two acts of every unusual theatrical occasion. Page through every book that
made a stir.
For six of the best years in a man’s or a woman’s life, each gave all that the
other could ask. Six years that largely coincided with those in which much of
mankind were saying heartbreaking farewells, dying on the battlefield or under
the rubble of shattered cities, years when crazed adults were stealing crusts of
bread from children. The world’s grief did not pale the cheeks of Innokenty
and Dotnara.
We are given only one life, remember! . . .
But in the sixth year of their married life, when the bombers were grounded
and the guns fell silent, when tremulous green shoots were struggling through
the black cinders and people everywhere had begun to remember that we only
live once, all the fruits of the earth, all that it is good to smell, to feel, to eat, to
drink, to handle, palled on Innokenty and began to disgust him.
Alarmed by these feelings, he fought against them as though they were an
illness. He hoped in vain that they would pass. The worst of it was that he
could not explain them. It might seem that everything he could wish for was
within his grasp, but something important was lacking. At twenty-eight and in
perfect health, Innokenty felt that his own life and the life of all around him had
reached a dead end.
He stopped enjoying the company of close friends who had once amused
him. This one suddenly seemed unintelligent; that other was coarse; yet another
too full of himself.
But it wasn’t just his friends. He began to detach and distance himself from
the flaxen-haired Dotty (he had long ago started using this Europeanized
version of Dotnara’s name), from the wife to whom he used to feel
indissolubly joined.
There was a time when the thought of her was a piercing joy. When he could
never tire of her lips, even when he felt lifeless and despondent. He had known
no other lips like hers. Of all the beautiful and clever women he met, Dotty
alone existed for him, and suddenly he could not help seeing in her a lack of
refinement and began to find her opinions intolerable.
Her remarks about literature, art, and the theater in particular now seemed to
him invariably wide of the mark, jarringly crude and imperceptive, and she
delivered herself of them so categorically. Sharing silence with her was as
good as ever, talking to her more and more difficult.
Innokenty began to feel cramped by their monotonously glamorous lifestyle,
but Dotty would not hear of any change. To make matters worse, instead of
ruthlessly abandoning things in favor of something new and better, she had
developed a habit of greedily treating as permanent possessions all the things
she found in each of their apartments. Dotty had used her two years in Paris to
send home big cardboard boxes full of lengths of fabric, shoes, dresses, and
hats. Innokenty disliked this, but the more glaringly their wishes diverged, the
more emphatically she insisted that she was right. Had she only recently
acquired or had she always had, unnoticed by Innokenty, that unpleasant way of
chewing, or rather chomping, especially when she ate fruit?
The trouble, of course, lay not in his friends, not in his wife, but in Innokenty
himself. There was something lacking in his life, and he did not know what it
was.
His friends had long ago decided that he was an “Epicurean,” and he readily
accepted the label, without really knowing what it meant. Then one day, at
home in Moscow with nothing to do, he had had the amusing idea of reading
what his “master” had in fact taught. He started searching the cabinets left by
his late mother for a book about Epicurus that he remembered seeing in his
childhood.
Going through the old cabinets was a task Innokenty began with an unpleasant
sensation of stiffness, a reluctance to bend, to move heavy objects around, to
breathe dust. Even this was unusually hard work for him, and he soon tired. But
he forced himself to go on, and a refreshing breeze seemed to play on him from
the depths of those old cabinets, which had a ripe smell all their own. He
found the book on Epicurus, among other things, and read it later, but more
important was what he discovered, from her letters, about his late mother,
whom he had never understood and to whom he had felt close only as a child.
Even her death had left him almost unmoved. In early childhood a vision of
silvered bugles raised toward an ornate ceiling and the song “Let Leaping
Flames Light Up the Blue Night” had fused with Innokenty’s idea of his father.
A father whom he did not really remember at all; he had been killed in 1921,
suppressing the peasant rebellion in Tambov province. But he was surrounded
by people who never tired of telling him about the heroic naval officer’s
glorious role in the Civil War. Hearing those praises sung everywhere and by
everybody, Innokenty began to feel very proud of his father and his fight for the
common folk against rich people wallowing in luxury. Whereas he rather
looked down on his anxious mother, nursing her unspoken grief in the midst of
her books and hot-water bottles. Like most sons, he did not stop to think that,
besides himself and his upbringing, his mother had some sort of life of her
own. That she could be ill and suffer. And now she had died at the age of fortyseven.
His parents had spent hardly any time together. But this, too, was something
the boy had no occasion to think about, and it never occurred to him to question
his mother.
Now the whole story unfolded in her letters and diaries. Their marriage was
not a marriage but a whirlwind event, like everything in those years.
Circumstances had flung them roughly and briefly together, circumstances
allowed them to see very little of each other, and circumstances parted them.
But in these diaries his mother was revealed as not just an appendage to his
father, as their son had been accustomed to thinking, but as someone with a
world of her own. Innokenty now learned that his mother had loved another
man all her life and had never been able to marry him. That it was perhaps
only for the sake of her son’s career that she had borne till the day she died a
name that was alien to her.
Stored in the cabinets were bundles of letters tied with colored ribbons of
fine fabric. Letters from girlhood friends and from friends and acquaintances of
later years, actors, artists, and poets long forgotten or mentioned nowadays
only disparagingly. Old-fashioned exercise notebooks with blue morocco
covers held his mother’s diaries, written in Russian and French in her strange
hand; it was as though a wounded bird had skimmed the page and scratched an
erratic trail with its faltering claw. Recollections of literary soirées and
theatrical events took up many pages. He was deeply moved by her description
of herself, an enraptured girl, standing on the station in Petersburg one white
June night among a crowd of admirers all weeping for joy as they welcomed
the Moscow Arts Theater company. Pure love of art reigned triumphant in
these pages. Innokenty could think of no such company nowadays; nor could he
imagine anyone missing a night’s sleep to welcome it, except those dragooned
by the Department of Culture, carrying bouquets funded from the public purse.
And obviously, no one would ever dream of shedding tears on such an
occasion.
The diaries led him on and on. There were pages headed “Ethical Notes”;
“Goodness shows itself first in pity,” said one of them.
Innokenty wrinkled his brow. Pity? A shameful feeling, degrading to the one
who pities and the one who is pitied—so he had learned at school and in life.
“Never think yourself more right than other people. Respect other people’s
opinions even when they are inimical to yours.”
That was pretty old-fashioned, too. If I have a correct worldview, can I
really respect those who disagree with me?
He almost forgot that he was reading and seemed to hear clearly his mother’s
frail voice.
“What is the most precious thing in the world? I see now that it is the
knowledge that you have no part in injustice. Injustice is stronger than you, it
always was and always will be, but let it not be done through you.”
If Innokenty had opened the diary six years earlier, he would not even have
noticed those lines. But now he read them slowly and with surprise. There was
nothing esoteric in them and much that was simply untrue, but still he was
surprised. Even the words in which his mother and her women friends
expressed themselves were outdated. In all seriousness, they began certain
words with capital letters—Truth, Goodness, Beauty, Good and Evil, the
Ethical Imperative. In the language used by Innokenty and those around him,
words were more concrete and easier to understand—progressiveness,
humanity, dedication, purposefulness.
But although Innokenty was progressive and humane and dedicated and
purposeful (purposefulness was what all his contemporaries most prized and
cultivated in themselves), sitting there on a low stool by the cabinets he felt
that something he had lacked was stealing into his heart.
There were also albums of old photographs, clear and sharply defined.
Several separate bundles consisted of Moscow and Petersburg theater
programs. There was the theatrical daily Spectator. And the Cinema Herald.
(He hadn’t realized that they went back so far.) And piles and piles of
magazines, all sorts of magazines—their names alone were enough to make a
man dizzy: Apollo, Golden Fleece, The Hyperborean, Pegasus, World of Art.
There were reproductions of unknown paintings and sculptures (not a trace of
any of them in the Tretyakov Gallery) and of stage sets. Poems by unknown
poets. Innumerable magazine supplements, with dozens of European writers of
whom Innokenty had never heard. But it wasn’t just individual writers; there
were whole publishing houses long forgotten, as if the earth had swallowed
them: Gryphon, Dogrose, Scorpion, Musagetes, Halcyon, Northern Lights,
Logos.
He sat there for days on end, on the little stool by the wide-open cabinets,
breathing their air, intoxicated with it and with his mother’s little world, which
his father had once entered, wearing a black raincoat, girded with hand
grenades, and bearing a Cheka search warrant. Early twentieth-century Russia,
with its ideological battles, its dizzy proliferation of trends and movements, its
unbridled imagination, and its anxious forebodings, looked out at Innokenty
from these yellowing pages—Russia of the last pre-Revolutionary decade,
which he had been taught at school and in the institute to regard as the most
shameful and most barren in Russia’s history, a decade so hopeless that if the
Bolsheviks had not come to the rescue, Russia left to itself would have rotted
and collapsed.
It had, indeed, been a garrulous decade, too sure of itself at times, yet
somehow impotent. But what a proliferation of new growth! What a burgeoning
of new ideas!
Innokenty realized what he had been robbed of till now.
Dotnara had arrived to carry her husband off to some official reception.
Innokenty had stared at her uncomprehendingly, then frowned, picturing that
pompous assembly where everybody would unreservedly agree with
everybody else, where all would spring to their feet with alacrity to drink the
first toast—“To Comrade Stalin!”—then eat and drink a great deal with no
further thought of Comrade Stalin and then play cards like idiots.
His eyes returned from an unfathomable distance to his wife, and he begged
her to go alone. That anyone should prefer poking about in old albums to real
life at a reception seemed crazy to Dotnara. Innokenty’s finds in the cabinets
were bound up with vague but never-dying recollections of his childhood, and
they meant a great deal to him but nothing to his wife.
His mother had triumphed; she had risen from the grave and taken her son
from his bride.
Once launched, Innokenty could not stop. If he had been misled about one
thing, perhaps there were others.
For some years now, he had lacked both the wish and the energy to study.
(His fluent French, which had been such a help in his career, he had acquired
in childhood from his mother.) But now he began reading avidly. His blunted
and jaded appetites gave way to this new passion for reading.
He found, though, that even reading was a special skill, not just a matter of
running your eyes along the lines. He discovered that he was a savage, reared
in the caves of social science, clad in the skins of class warfare. His whole
education had trained him to take certain books on trust and reject others
unread. From boyhood he had been sheltered from erroneous books and had
read only those that were warranted sound, so that he had got into the habit of
believing every word, of submitting without question to the author’s will.
When he began to read authors who contradicted one another, his resistance
was low, and he could not help surrendering to whichever of them he had read
last. What he found most difficult of all was to lay down his book and think for
himself.
Why, he wondered, had the February Revolution disappeared from Soviet
calendars, as though it was an insignificant detail in the chronology of 1917?
Why, indeed, were they so reluctant to call it a revolution? Perhaps only
because it made no work for the guillotine? But the tsar had been overthrown,
and with him a regime six centuries old, at a single push; and nobody rushed to
pick up the crown, everybody sang and laughed and exchanged congratulations,
yet there was no place for this day in a calendar that meticulously noted the
birthdays of greasy swine like Zhdanov and Shcherbakov.
Whereas October 1917, which all Soviet books in the twenties called a
coup, was magnified as the greatest Revolution in the history of mankind. What
were Zinoviev and Kamenev accused of in October 1917? Of betraying the
“Secret of the Revolution” to the bourgeoisie. But can you prevent a volcano
from erupting by looking into the crater? Can you block the path of a hurricane
when you receive a weather report? Could they have “betrayed the secret”?
Only the secret of a narrow conspiracy! And that tells us everything. There was
no elemental, nationwide flare-up in October; all that happened was that the
conspirators assembled at a given signal.
Shortly afterward, Innokenty was posted to Paris. There he had access to all
shades of world opinion and to all Russian émigré literature (though, of
course, he had to look over his shoulder at bookstores). He could read and
read and read! Though his duties, of course, got in the way.
Until then he had thought that his job was the best and his lot the luckiest he
could possibly have hoped for. But now he began to feel that there was
something sordid about it. Being a Soviet diplomat meant not only delivering,
day in and day out, statements at which people with their heads screwed on
right were bound to laugh. The other part of the job was more important, the
secret part: meeting characters with code names, collecting information,
passing on instructions and money.
In his carefree youth, before his crisis, Innokenty had seen nothing
reprehensible about this backdoor business; he had thought it fun and made
light work of it. Now it was distasteful, repellent.
The great truth for Innokenty used to be that we are given only one life.
Now, with the new feeling that had ripened in him, he became aware of
another law: that we are given only one conscience, too.
A life laid down cannot be reclaimed, nor can a ruined conscience.
But there was no one, no one at all in Innokenty’s circle, not even his wife, to
whom he could tell all these new thoughts. She had not understood or
sympathized with the belated affection he had felt for his dead mother; nor did
she understand why anyone would take an interest in events that were over and
done with, never to return. If she had known that he had begun to despise his
job, she would have been horrified; this job of his was the foundation of their
glittering prosperity.
The gap between them had widened so far in the past year that he could no
longer risk revealing himself.
But even on leave in the USSR, Innokenty had no intimates. Touched by
Klara’s naive story about the cleaner on the stairway, he had hoped for an
instant that here at last was someone he could talk to freely. But from the first
steps they took, the first words they exchanged on their walk, he saw that he
was mistaken. Impassable thickets lay between them, too dense to disentangle
and tear asunder. And although it would have been quite natural for him to
complain about his wife to his wife’s sister and although that would have
brought them closer together, he was disinclined to do it.
Why? For one thing, a strange law decrees that it is futile trying to develop
an understanding with a woman if she is not physically attractive to you;
somehow your lips are sealed; you are paralyzed by the hopelessness of trying
to say all you need to say; frank and simple words elude you.
Then again, he had not gone to see his uncle, had made no effort to go when
he should have. What was the good? A complete waste of time. There would
be nothing but tedious, pointless interrogation and exclamations of wonder
about “abroad.”
Another year went by, in Paris and in Rome. He arranged to go to Rome
without his wife. Only to learn on his return that he had shared her with an
officer on the General Staff. She was unrepentant, indeed stubbornly selfrighteous
about it, and shifted all the blame onto Innokenty; he should not have
left her by herself.
Yet he felt no pain, no sense of loss, but rather relief. Since then he had been
at a desk in the ministry for four months, in Moscow the whole time, but they
lived like strangers. Divorce was out of the question, however; it would ruin a
diplomat’s career. And Innokenty was marked out for posting to the UN
Secretariat in New York.
This latest posting pleased him but also frightened him. He liked the United
Nations as an idea, not its charter but what it could be, given a general
willingness to compromise and to avoid malicious point scoring. He was very
much in favor of world government. What else could save the planet? But that
was the spirit in which Swedes or Burmese or Ethiopians could go to the UN.
He was propelled by an iron fist at his back. Once again he was packed off
with a secret mission, an undeclared purpose, a double memory, and a
poisonous hidden brief.
During those months in Moscow, he did at last find time to visit his uncle at
Tver.