Chapter-76-Favorite-Profession

SECURITYOPERATIONS at the Marfino establishment were subdivided between
Major Myshin, godfather of the prison, and Major Shikin, godfather on the
production side. Belonging as they did to different government departments and
drawing their salaries from different paymasters, they were not rivals. But
indolence prevented them from collaborating; their offices were in different
buildings and on different floors, security operations are never discussed on
the telephone, and since they were equal in rank, each of them thought it would
demean him to take the initiative and pay his respects to the other. So they
continued to work on men’s minds as they always had, one of them by night, the
other by day, without meeting for months on end, although they both spoke in
their quarterly reports and plans of the need for close coordination of security
operations at Marfino.
Reading Pravda one day, Major Shikin lingered over the headline of an
article: “The Profession He Loves.” (The article was about an agitator who
loved nothing in the world so much as explaining things to people: explaining
to workers the importance of raising productivity, to soldiers the need to
sacrifice their lives, to electors the correctness of the policies of the
Communist and Non-Party Bloc.) Shikin liked the phrase. He, too, he decided,
had made the right career choice; he had never in his life felt drawn to any
other profession, he loved the one he had chosen, and it loved him.
Shikin had gone through the GPU training school, then the diploma courses
for investigators, but he had done very little investigation in the strict sense and
could not really call himself an investigator. He had worked as a security
officer in the transport network. He had been used by the People’s
Commissariat of Internal Affairs as a special scrutineer of hostile votes cast in
“secret” elections to the Supreme Soviet. During the war he had been in charge
of military censorship on one of the fronts, had served on a repatriation
commission, then in a camp for returning prisoners of war, after which he had
helped to organize the deportation of the Greeks from the Kuban to Kazakhstan,
and finally he had become senior security officer in the Marfino Research
Institute.
This was the profession that Shikin dearly loved. And which of his
comrades-in-arms did not?
It was not a dangerous profession. In every security operation superior force
was ensured: two or three armed officers to a single enemy, neither armed nor
forewarned, and often half awake.
It was, however, well paid. Officers had access to the best special shops.
They lived in the best apartments (confiscated from convicts). They drew
higher pensions than army officers. They took their vacations in first-class
resorts.
It was not exhausting work. There were no production norms. True, friends
had told Shikin that in 1937 and again in 1945 investigating officers had
worked like cart horses, but he had never been rushed off his feet and couldn’t
quite believe it. There were good spells when you could doze at your desk for
months on end. The style of work in the Ministries of the Interior and State
Security was nothing if not leisurely. The natural leisureliness of all
comfortable people was supplemented by the leisureliness officially
prescribed as the best means of psychological pressure on a prisoner to get a
statement out of him: the unhurried sharpening of pencils, the careful selection
of pens and paper, the patient recording of all sorts of superfluous details and
officially required data. The leisureliness of the work had a most beneficial
effect on the nerves of the Chekists and accounted for their longevity.
The routine of operational work was no less precious to Shikin. It was
essentially a form of stocktaking, pure and simple (making it a manifestation of
one of socialism’s most fundamental characteristics). An interview was never
just that; it had to be rounded off with a written denunciation, a signed
protocol, an undertaking not to make false depositions, not to divulge
confidential matters, not to leave the district, an acknowledgment of
notification. . . . What this work required was precisely the patient attention to
detail and methodical habits that were such a distinctive feature of Shikin’s
character. Without them you could only create chaos with all those bits of
paper, instead of classifying them and filing them so that you could put your
hand on any item at any time. (Shikin, being an officer, could not perform
manual tasks such as filing official papers, so this was done by a special
confidential secretary, a lanky, weak-sighted woman borrowed from the main
prison office.)
But what Shikin liked most of all about his work was the power it gave him
over other people, the feeling of omnipotence, and the aura of mystery.
Shikin was flattered by the respect, indeed the awe, which he inspired in
colleagues who, although themselves Cheka men, were not security operations
officers. They were all, Engineer Colonel Yakonov included, bound to give
Shikin an account of their activities on demand, whereas he was accountable to
none of them. As he went up the broad, carpeted main stairway—darkfeatured,
with close-cropped graying hair, carrying a large briefcase under his
arm—girl lieutenants in the Ministry of State Security shrank bashfully from
him, though there was plenty of room, and hastened to greet him first, and
Shikin was proudly conscious of his importance and uniqueness.
If anybody had told him—but nobody ever did—that he had earned the hatred
of others, that he was a tormentor of other people, he would have been
genuinely indignant. He had never been one to inflict pain for pleasure or for
the sake of it. He knew, of course, that such people existed. He had seen them
on stage and in films, sadists with a passion for torturing people, inhuman
monsters, but they were always either White Guardists or fascists. Shikin was
only doing his duty. His only aim was to ensure that nobody did or thought
anything harmful.
One day a bundle containing 150 rubles was found on the main staircase of
the sharashka, which was used by both free employees and zeks. The two
lieutenants, both technicians, who found it could neither conceal it nor
surreptitiously try to find the owner, precisely because there were two of them.
So they handed their find over to Major Shikin.
Money dumped on a staircase used by zeks, who were most strictly
forbidden to have money—this was an event of the highest political
significance! Shikin, however, did not make a big thing of it. He simply put up
a notice on the stairway: “Whoever has lost 150 on the stairs can reclaim them
from Major Shikin at any time.”
It was not a small sum. Yet such was the respect and awe felt by all for
Shikin that days and weeks went by, and nobody came forward to claim this
tiresome item of lost property. The notice faded and gathered dust, one corner
came unstuck, and in the end somebody’s blue pencil added a postscript in
block letters: “Choke on it, you dog.”
The duty officer tore the notice down and took it to Shikin. For a long time
afterward he took walks around the laboratories looking for a pencil with the
right shade of blue. Shikin did not deserve the crude insult. He had absolutely
no intention of pocketing the money. What he really wanted was for the person
concerned to come forward so that an example could be made of him and the
case discussed in detail at conferences on vigilance.
But of course the money could not simply be thrown away! So two months
later, the major presented it to the lanky maiden with the walleye who filed his
papers once a week.
Shikin had been a model family man until the devil tripped him up and
shackled him to this secretary. Her thirty-eight wasted years showed in her
face, her legs were thick and ugly, she stood head and shoulders above him,
. . . but he had discovered in her something he had never experienced before:
He could hardly wait for her weekly visit. When he was moved to temporary
quarters while his office was under repair, he couldn’t help himself and so far
forgot the need for caution that two prisoners, a carpenter and a plasterer,
overheard them and even saw them through a crack. It got around, and the zeks
chuckled among themselves over their spiritual director. They even thought of
writing to Shikin’s wife; only they didn’t know the address. Instead, they
denounced him to his superiors.
They did not succeed, though, in toppling the senior operations officer. Major
General Oskolupov gave Shikin a dressing-down, not because of his liaison
with the secretary (that was between her and her principles), nor yet because
this liaison was conducted in office hours (since Major Shikin had no fixed
office hours), but only for letting prisoners find out about it.
ON MONDAY, DECEMBER 26, Major Shikin arrived at work a little after 9:00
a.m., although nobody would have said anything if he had not turned up till
lunchtime.
Opposite Yakonov’s office on the third floor, there was a niche, or lobby,
with no electric lighting, in which two doors faced each other, one to Shikin’s
office, one to that of the Party Committee. Both doors were upholstered with
black leather, and neither bore any inscription. The proximity of these two
doors facing each other in the dark lobby was very convenient for Shikin:
Curious eyes could not be sure which door people were sneaking through.
As he approached his office on this occasion, Shikin met Stepanov, the
secretary of the Party Committee, a thin, unhealthy man with opaquely glittering
glasses. They shook hands, and Stepanov quietly asked him in. “Comrade
Shikin!” (He never called anyone by his name and patronymic.) “Step inside,
and we’ll knock the balls about a bit!”
This was an invitation to play on the miniature billiards table in the Party
Committee’s office. Shikin did sometimes go in and bang the balls about, but a
lot of important business awaited him, and he declined with a dignified shake
of his silvering head.
Stepanov sighed and went off to chase the balls around by himself.
Shikin entered his office and placed his briefcase tidily on his desk. (His
papers, all secret or top secret, had to be kept in a safe and never left the room,
but he would not have made much of an impression walking around without a
briefcase. He used it to carry home copies of Bonfire, Crocodile, and Around
the World. (Subscribing to them himself could have cost him a kopeck or two.)
Then he took a stroll along the carpet, paused at the window, and turned back
toward the door. It was as if his thoughts had been waiting there in his office
for him, lurking behind the safe, the cabinet, the sofa; and now they crowded
around all at once, demanding attention.
So much to be done! So much to be done.
He rubbed his graying crewcut with both hands.
For a start, he had to review an innovation to which he had given many
months of thought. Yakonov had sanctioned it, and the laboratories had been
instructed accordingly, but it was not yet operating smoothly. The new rule
required staff to keep secret logbooks. Thorough examination of security
precautions in the Marfino Institute had convinced Shikin—and he was very
proud of his discovery—that as yet there was no real secrecy in the place. Yes,
there were man-high steel safes in every room (the loot from Lorenz AG had
included fifty of them). Yes, all secret and semisecret documents were locked
up in these safes for the lunch break, the supper break, and the night. But there
was a fatal oversight: Only finished and half-finished work was locked up. The
flashes of inspiration, the preliminary hypotheses, the tentative conjectures that
held most promise for the future and could be seen as next year’s work in
embryo were as yet not locked away. An adroit spy with some technical
knowledge would only have to get through the barbed-wire fences into the
prison precinct, find a bit of blotting paper with one of those drawings or
diagrams in a trash can somewhere, then make his way out of the precinct
again, and American intelligence would be looking over the shoulders of the
researchers. Nothing if not conscientious, Major Shikin had once made
Yegorov the yardman examine the whole contents of the trash can in the yard.
They had found two soggy scraps of paper stuck together by snow and ash on
which nonetheless traces of diagrams were clearly visible. At the risk of
dirtying his hands, Shikin held this bit of trash by its corners and carried it to
Colonel Yakonov’s desk. Yakonov had no escape! So Shikin’s project for the
introduction of personal secret logbooks was adopted. Suitable ledgers were
promptly obtained from the ministry’s stockrooms. Each had two hundred
pages, numbered, perforated, and bearing wax seals. These logbooks were to
be distributed to everyone except the fitters, the turners, and the yardman.
Nothing was to be written down except on the pages of a personal logbook.
There was another important innovation here besides the elimination of
dangerous rough drafts: The thought processes of personnel were open to
inspection! Since dates had to be entered daily, Major Shikin could check
whether this or that prisoner had done much thinking on Wednesday and how
many new ideas he had had on Friday.
Two hundred fifty such logbooks would be an additional 250 Shikins, one of
whom would hover importunately over each prisoner. Prisoners are always
cunning and lazy; they always try to avoid work if they possibly can. You can
check up on a manual worker by looking at his output. Checking up on an
engineer or scientist is not so easy, but that was where Shikin’s innovation
came in! (Such a pity that there are no Stalin Prizes for security operations
officers.) This was the day chosen to verify that a logbook had been handed to
each prisoner and that entries were being made.
Another of Shikin’s chores for the day was to complete the list of prisoners
to be transferred in the near future and to find out exactly when the transport
would be available.
Shikin was also preoccupied with an ambitious affair he had initiated but that
had made little progress so far—“the Case of the Broken Lathe.” The mounting
of a lathe had been cracked while a dozen prisoners were lugging it from
Laboratory No. 3 to the workshops. The investigation had been going on for a
week, and something like eighty pages of evidence had been recorded, but the
truth of the matter was as elusive as ever; none of the prisoners concerned was
new to the game.
It was also necessary to investigate the origin of the book by Dickens, as
Doronin had reported, prisoners in the semicircular room were reading,
especially Abramson. Summoning Abramson, an old lag, for questioning,
would be a waste of time. The thing to do was to call in the free personnel he
worked with and throw a scare into them by pretending that Abramson had
confessed.
Shikin had so much to do today. (And of course he didn’t know yet what
news his informers would have for him! Didn’t know that he was going to have
to look into that insulting parody of Soviet judicial procedure, “The Trial of
Prince Igor.”) A despairing Shikin rubbed his temples and brow vigorously,
calling this unruly throng of thought to order.
Uncertain where to begin, he decided to go among the masses, or, in other
words, to patrol the hallway in the hope of meeting an informant, who would
by a twitch of the eyebrows indicate that he had something urgent to report,
something that couldn’t wait for his scheduled visit.
But the moment he reached the duty officer’s desk, he heard him talking on
the telephone about some new group.
He couldn’t believe it! Such indecent haste! Setting up a new group on
Sunday, in his absence?
The duty officer told him all about it. It was a nasty blow! The vice minister
had turned up, various generals had turned up, and Shikin had not been there!
He had never felt so aggrieved. The vice minister might think that Shikin did
not worry himself sick about security! Besides, he should have been there to
warn them in time not to include that accursed Rubin in such an important
group—that double-dealer, that utter fraud, who swore that he believed in the
victory of Communism, yet refused to become an informant! And then, that
beard he wore, the scoundrel! A symbol of defiance! He should be forcibly
shaved!
Making haste slowly, taking careful little steps in his little boy’s shoes, oxheaded
Shikin made for Room 21.
There were, however, ways of dealing with Rubin. Just the other day he had
put in another of his applications to the Supreme Court for a judicial review. It
was in Shikin’s power to accompany the petition with a laudatory report on
Rubin or a nasty, negative one, as on previous occasions.
The door of Room 21 was blank, without glass panes. The major pushed the
door, but it was locked. He knocked. He heard no footsteps, but the door
opened slightly, and Smolosidov’s forbidding black forelock filled the
aperture. Seeing Shikin, he did not budge; nor did he open the door any wider.
“Morning,” Shikin mumbled.
Smolosidov took half a step back but continued to bar the way. He crooked a
finger at Shikin, who squeezed into the narrow opening and looked where he
was pointing. A small piece of paper was pinned to the other panel of the door,
inside.
LISTOF PERSONS WITH ACCESS TO ROOM 21
1.Deputy Minister of State Security Selivanovsky.
2.Head of Department Major General Bulbanyak.
3.Head of Department Major General Oskolupov.
4.Head of Group Engineer Major Roitman.
5.Lieutenant Smolosidov.
6.Prisoner Rubin.
By order of the Minister of State Security Abakumov
Shikin, overawed, stepped back into the hallway.
“I would . . . er . . . just like a word with Rubin,” he whispered.
“Can’t be done,” Smolosidov whispered back.
And closed the door.