Chapter-11-The-Enchanted-Castle

YAKONOVHAD HELD his position of trust as chief engineer of the Special
Technology Department of the MGB for several years now, during and since
the war. He wore with dignity the insignia of an engineer colonel, silver
epaulets with blue borders and three big stars, which his knowledge had
earned him. His position was such that he could exercise general supervision
from a distance, make an occasional erudite report to an audience of high
officeholders, indulge in an occasional clever and colorful conversation with
some engineer over his finished model, and in general enjoy the reputation of
an expert, bear no responsibility, and pick up a good few thousand rubles a
month. It was a post in which Yakonov had graciously bestowed his eloquence
on all the department’s ingenious technical schemes in their infancy, stayed
aloof from them in the days of growing pains and adolescent maladies, and
honored once again with his presence the pauper’s funeral of a failure or the
coronation of a hero with a crown of gold.
Anton Nikolaevich was not young or self-confident enough to chase after the
treacherous glitter of a Golden Star or the badge of a Stalin Prize winner, to
snap up for himself every task set by the ministry or by the Boss himself. Anton
Nikolaevich was sufficiently advanced in years and experience to avoid such
excitement—and the soaring exultation and plunges into despair inseparable
from it.
Clinging to these principles, he had survived without unpleasant incidents
until January 1948. Then, that January, somebody had suggested to the Father of
the Peoples of East and West the idea of creating a special secret telephone.
Nobody who intercepted his telephone conversations would be able to
understand them! He could sit in his country home at Kuntsevo and converse
with Molotov in New York! The Generalissimo’s august finger, yellowed
around the nail by nicotine, picked out the Marfino establishment, which had
previously been concerned with developing walkie-talkie sets for the militia.
The historic words spoken on the occasion were, “Why do I need these
transmitters? To catch burglars?”
He set a deadline—January 1, 1949. Then he thought a bit and added: “Well,
all right, make it May 1.”
The job was an extremely responsible one and the schedule extraordinarily
tight. After some thought, the ministry decided that Yakonov personally must
bring Marfino up to snuff. He tried hard to prove that he was overloaded
already and could not take on another commitment, but in vain. The head of his
department, Foma Guryanovich Oskolupov, had only to turn those green cat’s
eyes on him, and Yakonov remembered the blots on his record (he had been in
prison for six years) and fell silent.
That was almost two years ago, and the chief engineer’s office in the ministry
building had been unoccupied ever since. The chief engineer spent his days
and nights at the far end of town in the former seminary building with the
hexagonal tower over its redundant sanctuary.
At first he quite enjoyed running things personally: wearily slamming the
door of his personal Pobeda, speeding to Marfino lulled by its purring engine,
driving through the barbed-wire-festooned gates past a saluting sentry, walking
with an entourage of majors and captains under the century-old limes of the
Marfino copse. Yakonov’s superiors had demanded nothing of him except plan
after plan after plan, and “socialist obligations.” And the MGB’s horn of plenty
was inverted over the Marfino institute: equipment purchased from Britain and
America; equipment captured from the Germans; homegrown convicts
summoned from the camps; a technical library for twenty thousand new
acquisitions; the best security officers and archivists, the old bulls of the MGB
herd; and finally prison guards with the finest Lubyanka education. The old
building of the seminary had to be converted, and new buildings put up for the
prison staff and for the experimental workshops; so when the yellow flowers
on the limes sweetened the air, you could hear in the shade of those giants the
sad voices of slow-moving German war prisoners in bedraggled gray-green
tunics. These slothful fascists had no appetite for work after four years of
postwar imprisonment. No Russian eye could bear to watch them unloading
bricks from a truck: each brick slowly passed from hand to hand, as carefully
as if it were crystal, and gently stacked. While they were installing radiators
under the windows and re-laying rotten floors, the Germans sauntered through
super-secret rooms, squinted sullenly at the labels on equipment, some in
German, some in English—a German schoolboy could have guessed what sort
of work these laboratories would be doing. All of which was dealt with in a
report submitted by prisoner Rubin to the engineer colonel. He was right to do
so, but security officers Shikin and Myshin (“Shishkin-Myshkin” in prison
vernacular) did not find the report at all helpful: What were they supposed to
do about it? Report their own oversight to their superiors? In any case it was
too late, because the prisoners of war had been repatriated, and those who had
gone to West Germany could, if anyone was interested, report on the location
of the institute and of its individual laboratories. Yet when officers from other
MGB directorates had business with the engineer colonel, he was not allowed
to give them the address of his outfit, and rather than risk the least little chink
in his curtain of secrecy, he would travel to the Lubyanka to talk to them.
The Germans were dismissed and replaced by zeks just like those already in
the sharashka, except that their clothes were ragged and dirty and they were not
given white bread. What could be heard under the limes now, in and out of
season, was the steady buzz of healthy Gulag obscenities, reminding the zeks in
the sharashka of their unchanging motherland and their inescapable fate. Bricks
flew from trucks like leaves in the wind, so that scarcely one reached the
ground whole. Zeks chanting, “One, two, and down she comes” tipped the
plywood cover over the back of the truck and saved the guards work by
crawling under it themselves, merrily embraced the foully swearing wenches,
and were carried away through the streets of Moscow back to their camp for
the night.
So in this enchanted castle, separated from the capital and its unwitting
inhabitants by barbed wire and bullets, ghosts in black quilted jackets wrought
fabulous changes: Marfino acquired piped water, sanitation, central heating,
and neat flower beds.
Meanwhile the establishment so auspiciously founded grew and expanded.
Another institute, already engaged in similar work, was merged with Marfino,
arriving with its own desks, chairs, cabinets, loose-leaf files, apparatus that
would be obsolete in a matter of months, not of years, and its own head,
Engineer Major Roitman, who became Yakonov’s deputy. Alas, the creator of
the newly arrived institute, its inspirer and protector, Colonel Yakov Ivanovich
Mamurin, head of Special and Secret Communications in the Ministry of the
Interior, an outstanding servant of the state, had met his end in tragic
circumstances before all this.
One day the Leader of All Progressive Mankind, on the telephone to the
Chinese province of Yenan, had been annoyed by interference and crackling in
the receiver. He called Beria and said in Georgian:
“Lavrenty! What sort of idiot is in charge of communications in your
department? Remove him.”
Mamurin was duly removed, but only as far as the Lubyanka. No one knew
what to do with him next. The usual instructions were missing. Was he to be
put on trial? If so, on what charge? And how long should his sentence be? If he
had been an outsider, they could have slapped a “quarter” (of a century!) on
him and packed him off to Norilsk. But the big wheels of the MVD knew how
true it was that “where you go today I may follow tomorrow,” and held on to
Mamurin until they felt sure that Stalin had forgotten him. So there was no
investigation and no trial. He was simply relegated to his country home outside
Moscow.
One summer evening in 1948, a new zek was delivered to the Marfino
sharashka. Everything about his arrival was unusual: He was brought in a
passenger car, not in a prison car; he was escorted not by a common guard but
by the head of the Prisons Department of the MVD; and to cap it all, his first
supper was served under a butter-cloth cover in the office of the prison
governor.
They heard the new arrival (zeks are supposed to hear nothing but hear
everything) say that he “didn’t want any sausage” and the head of the Prisons
Department urging him to “take nourishment.” A zek who had gone to the
doctor for some medicine overheard this through a partition. After discussing
this hair-raising news, the basic population of the sharashka decided that the
new arrival was nevertheless a prisoner and went to bed satisfied.
Where the new man spent that first night is a question that historians of the
sharashka have not resolved. But one rather primitive zek, a ham-fisted fitter,
came face-to-face with the newcomer in the small hours on the wide marble
porch (later out-of-bounds to prisoners).
“Hi there, pal,” he said, with a friendly punch in the chest, “where’ve you
come from? What did you get done for? Sit down and let’s have a smoke.”
But the new arrival shied away from the fitter in disgust. His pale, lemony
face twisted in a grimace. The fitter looked hard at the pale eyes, the thinning
fair hair on the balding skull and said angrily: “The hell with you, then!
Vermin! Like something out of a lab jar! You’ll be locked up with the rest of us
after lights out, and you’ll sure as hell find your tongue then!”
But the “creature out of a lab jar” never was in fact shut up in the main
prison. They found him a little third-floor room, on the same hallway as the
laboratories, and wedged into it a bed, a table, a cupboard, a flowering plant
in a pot, and a hotplate, and tore down the cardboard blocking the barred
window, which however looked out not on God’s world but on a landing on
the rear stairway. The stairway itself was on the northern side of the building,
so that even in the daytime there was scarcely a glimmer of light in the
privileged prisoner’s cell. The bars could of course have been removed, but
after some hesitation the prison staff decided to leave them there. They
themselves did not understand this mysterious affair and could not decide on
the safest line to take.
The newcomer was promptly christened “the Man in the Iron Mask.” For
quite a time no one knew his name. Nor could anyone talk to him. They saw
him through the window, sitting dejectedly in his solitary cell, or wandering
like a pale ghost under the lime trees, at times when ordinary zeks were not
allowed out. The Man in the Iron Mask was as sallow and emaciated as any
“goner” after two good years of processing by interrogation officers, but his
foolhardy rejection of sausage made that scenario improbable.
Much later, when the Man in the Iron Mask started turning up for work in
Number Seven, the zeks learned from the free workers that he was in fact the
very same Colonel Mamurin who had forbidden his subordinates in the
Communications Department of the Ministry of the Interior to put their heels
down when they walked along the corridor: If anyone failed to walk on tiptoe,
he would rush out through his secretary’s room in a fury yelling: “Do you know
whose office you’re stamping past, you oaf? What’s your name?”
Much later they learned the reason for Mamurin’s sufferings. The world of
free men had rejected him, and he was too fastidious to join the world of zeks.
At first, he read a great deal in his solitude: The Struggle for Peace; Knight of
the Golden Star; Russia’s Glorious Sons; then the verses of Prokofiev and
Gribachev and . . . he underwent a miraculous transformation: He began
writing verse himself! It is well known that poets are born of unhappiness and
spiritual torment, and Mamurin’s torments were more agonizing than those of
any other prisoner. After two years inside, without examination or trial, the
latest Party directives were still his meat and drink, and the Wise Leader was
still his god. Mamurin confided to Rubin that the really terrible thing was not
prison food (his meals, incidentally, were prepared separately), or separation
from his family (he was, incidentally, driven home once a month to spend a
night in his own apartment), or the denial of primitive animal needs—no, it
grieved him to think that he had forfeited the trust of Iosif Vissarionovich; it
hurt to feel himself no longer a colonel but cashiered and dishonored. That was
what made imprisonment so much harder to bear for Communists like
themselves than for the unprincipled scum around them.
Rubin was indeed a Communist. But after receiving the confidences of his
would-be kindred spirit and reading his verses, Rubin recoiled from this happy
find and began avoiding Mamurin, hiding from him in fact, spending his time
among people who unfairly attacked him but were his equals in misfortune.
Mamurin was nagged by an ambition as importunate as toothache: to
vindicate himself in the eyes of the Party and the government. Alas, what this
director of communications knew about communications went no further than
the handling of a telephone receiver. Strictly speaking he was not capable of
work but only of management. But as manager of an operation patently doomed
to failure, he would hardly return to favor with the Communications Engineers’
Best Friend.
He must manage something assured of success. By then two such promising
projects had taken shape in the Marfino institute: the Scrambler and Number
Seven. People either take to each other or line up against each other at first
sight, obeying some impulse that defies logic. Yakonov and his deputy Roitman
had not taken to each other. Month by month they found each other more and
more insufferable. Harnessed as they were to the same chariot, by some
heavier hand, they could not break free; all they could do was pull in opposite
directions. When work on the secret telephone reached a stage at which
alternative experimental programs were possible, Roitman conscripted
everyone he could get for the Acoustics Laboratory to work on the “vocoder.”
(The name was derived from the English “voice coder.” An attempt was made
to substitute a Russian name meaning “artificial speech apparatus,” but it had
not caught on.) Yakonov’s riposte was to denude all the other groups: The
cleverest engineers and the finest imported equipment were concentrated in
Number Seven. Other projects wilted and died in the unequal struggle.
Mamurin had chosen Number Seven for two reasons. For one thing, he could
not subordinate himself to his own former subordinate, Roitman. And for
another, the ministry, too, thought it was just as well that Yakonov, a non-Party
man with a past, should have an unsleeping fiery eye at his back.
From that day on, Yakonov could please himself whether or not he spent the
night in the institute. The cashiered MVD colonel, suppressing his poetic
passion for the sake of his country’s technical progress, the lonely prisoner
with the feverish pale eyes and the hideously sunken cheeks renouncing food
and sleep, burning himself out like a candle, kept Number Seven on a fifteenhour
day and remained at his post till 2:00 a.m. Such a conveniently long
working day was possible only in Number Seven, for there was no need for
free employees to work nights in order to supervise Mamurin.
It was to Number Seven that Yakonov had gone when he left Verenyov and
Nerzhin together in his office.