Chapter-90-On-the-Back-Stairway

WORRIED TO DISTRACTION and still reeling from the shock of Ruska’s arrest
(the buzz had gone around two hours ago, after Shikin had broken into Ruska’s
desk, and was confirmed at evening roll call when the orderly officer
pretended not to notice Ruska’s absence), Nerzhin almost forgot about his
rendezvous with Gerasimovich.
Routine had inexorably brought him back fifteen minutes after roll call to the
same two desks, the same open journals, and the upended amplifier still
spotted with Simochka’s tears. And now Gleb and Simochka were condemned
to sit facing each other for another two hours (and tomorrow, the next day, and
every day, all day long), staring at their papers so that their eyes would not
meet.
But the minute hand of the electric clock jumped toward 9:15, and Nerzhin
suddenly remembered. He was not really in the mood just at present to talk
about the rational society, but maybe this was as good a time as any. He locked
the left-hand side of his desk, where his more important records were kept,
and, without tidying up his papers or turning off the desk lamp, went out into
the hallway, cigarette in mouth. He sauntered over to the glass door that opened
onto the back stairs and gave it a push. As expected, it was unlocked.
Nerzhin took a casual look behind him. No one to be seen along the hallway.
He stepped briskly across the threshold, from wooden floor to concrete floor,
keeping his hand on the door so that he could close it noiselessly, and set off up
the stairs, into the gathering gloom, drawing on his cigarette occasionally to
help him see his way.
The Iron Mask’s window was unlit. A band of fading light filtered through
one of the outer windows onto the upper landing.
After twice tangling with junk dumped on the staircase, Nerzhin called out
from the top step in a subdued voice, “Is anyone there?”
A voice, which might or might not belong to Gerasimovich, called out,
“Who’s that?”
“It’s . . . only me.” Nerzhin pronounced the words slowly, in order to help
the other man recognize him, and pulled on his cigarette so that the glow would
light up his face.
A narrow beam from Gerasimovich’s pocket flashlight indicated the block of
wood on which Nerzhin had sat the day before, after the visit. Gerasimovich
perched on one just like it.
A throng of invisible witnesses—the serf artist’s paintings—lurked on the
walls around them.
“There you are, you see, after all our years in jail, we’re greenhorns when it
comes to conspiracy,” Gerasimovich said. “We omitted to take the simplest
precaution. The newcomer hasn’t given himself away, but the person waiting in
the dark must not call out. We should have thought of some sort of password
for you to use on the stairs.”
“Ye-e-es,” Nerzhin drawled, taking his seat. “We certainly have our work cut
out. We’re busy enough earning our bread and trying to save our souls, but we
also have to learn to hold our own against the overfed apparatchiks of the
KGB. How many of them are there? A couple of million? We have to live so
many lives in one lifetime. No wonder we can’t keep up! How do we know
Mamurin isn’t lying on his bed in the dark? If he is, we might as well be having
this conversation in Shikin’s office.”
“I made sure before coming here; he’s in Number Seven. If he comes back,
we will be aware of him first. So let’s get on with it.”
His words were businesslike, but he sounded tired and distracted.
“Actually, I was going to ask you to postpone our talk. But the fact is that I’ll
be leaving this place any day now.”
“Is that definite?”
“Yes.”
“As a matter of fact, I will be leaving, too, though not quite so soon. I haven’t
given satisfaction.”
“If only we knew that you and I will find ourselves in the same transit prison,
we could have our talk then—plenty of time for it there. But prison history
teaches us never to put off a conversation.”
“Yes. I’ve learned that lesson myself.”
“All right, then. You doubt whether it’s possible to construct a rational
society.”
“I doubt it very much. To the point of total disbelief.”
“And yet it’s not at all complicated. But constructing it is a job for the elite,
not the asinine hoi polloi. And the society to be constructed is not a
‘democratic’ one or a ‘socialist’ one; these are secondary characteristics. The
society to be constructed is an intellectual one. It will of necessity also be
rational.”
“So that’s it,” Nerzhin drawled, disappointed. “You’ve outlined your plan in
three sentences. But it would take more than three evenings to make sense of
them. To begin with, how do you distinguish between ‘intellectual’ and
‘rational’? We know all about the rational society. French rationalists have
already made one great Revolution. Spare us any more of that!”
“They weren’t rationalists, just windbags. The intellectuals haven’t carried
out their Revolution yet.”
“And they never will. They’re like tadpoles—big heads and nothing else. An
intellectual society . . . how do you visualize it? It would obviously have
nothing to do with ethics and religion?”
“Not necessarily. We can make provision for them.”
“Make provision! But that’s just what you’re not doing. An intellectual
society—what do we imagine it would be like? Engineers without priests.
Everything functioning beautifully, a perfectly rational economy, everybody in
the right job—and a rapid accumulation of all good things. But that’s not
enough, take it from me! Society’s aims must not be purely material!”
“Adjustments can be made later on. But for the time being, most of the
countries in the world. . . .”
“I don’t want to talk about the time being! And later on will be too late! You
talk about a rational social structure. Then you tell me it will be nonsocialist.
Well, I don’t give a damn about that; the form of property ownership is of
minimal importance, and who knows which is best. But when you say ‘not
democratic,’ that frightens me. What does that mean? Why?”
Out of the pitch darkness, Gerasimovich answered precisely, choosing his
words as carefully as a fastidious writer.
“We have been starved of freedom, so we think that freedom should have no
limits. But unless limits are set to freedom, there can be no well-adjusted
society. The restrictions, however, must not be of the kind that shackle us now.
And people must be kept honestly informed, not deluded. We think of
democracy as a sun that never sets. But what does democracy really mean?
Truckling to the uncouth majority. And that means accepting mediocrity as the
norm, pruning the highest and most delicate growths. The votes of a hundred or
a thousand blockheads set the course for the enlightened.”
“Hm-m.” Nerzhin seemed to be at a loss. “This is all new to me. . . . I don’t
understand . . . don’t know . . . must think about it. . . . I’m used to the idea of
democracy. What would we have in place of democracy?”
“Equitable inequality. Inequality based on talent, natural or cultivated. You
can please yourself whether you call it ‘the authoritarian state’ or ‘the rule of
the intellectual elite.’ It will be rule by selfless, completely disinterested,
luminous people.”
“Heavens above! As an ideal, that’s just fine. But how is your elite to be
selected? And, above all, how do you persuade the rest that this is the true
elite? After all, a man’s intellectual capacity isn’t stamped on his brow, and
honesty doesn’t give off a glow. We were promised that it would be just like
that under socialism; our rulers would be clad in light, like angels—and look
at the ugly customers who crawled out of the woodwork. All sorts of questions
arise. What about political parties? Or rather, how do we dispense with
political parties, the old type and—heaven forfend—the new type? Mankind
awaits the prophet who can tell us how to do without political parties
altogether. Party membership always means leveling down to the majority,
accepting discipline, saying things you don’t mean. Every party warps the
individual and perverts justice. The leader of the opposition criticizes the
government not because it has really made a mistake but because—well, what
else is the opposition for?”
“There you are—you yourself are moving away from democracy and toward
my system.”
“Not really! Just a tiny bit closer, perhaps. Authoritarianism, now. What are
we to say about it? The state must exercise authority, of course. But what sort
of authority? Moral authority! Power relying not on bayonets but on love and
respect. Able to say, ‘Fellow countrymen! You must not do this! It is wrong!’
so that they are all conscience-stricken and know in their hearts ‘This is bad!
We will eschew it! We will do it no more!’ What other way is there? What is
called ‘authoritarianism’ is totalitarianism in embryo. I’d sooner have
something on the Swiss model. Remember what Herzen says? The lower the
authority, the more powerful it is: The most powerful is the village assembly,
the most impotent man in the state is the president. . . . All right, I’m not really
serious. Perhaps you and I are being a bit premature? Rational structure! It
would be more rational to discuss how to escape from the irrational. We can’t
even do that, although it’s a more immediate concern.”
The voice from the darkness was unperturbed.
“That is, in fact, the main subject of our discussion.”
And, as calmly as if they were talking about changing a fused valve in a
circuit: “I think the time has come for us, the Russian technical intelligentsia, to
change the form of government in Russia.”
Nerzhin was taken aback. Not that he did not trust Gerasimovich; the very
look of the man had inspired a feeling of kinship, although they had, as it
happened, never talked until now.
But the quiet voice from the darkness, composed and somewhat solemn, sent
a little shiver along Nerzhin’s spine.
“Alas, spontaneous revolution is impossible in our country. Even in Old
Russia, where those intent on subversion enjoyed almost unrestricted freedom,
it took three years of war—and what a war—to stir up the people. While
nowadays a joke at the tea table can cost you your head—what hope is there of
revolution?”
“No need for the ‘Alas,’ ” Nerzhin replied. “To hell with revolution: Your
elite would be the first to be massacred. Culture and beauty would be
eliminated; everything good would be destroyed.”
“All right, forget the ‘Alas.’ But that’s why many among us have begun to set
their hopes on help from outside. That seems to me a profound and damaging
mistake. What the ‘Internationale’says isn’t all that stupid. We look nowhere
else for deliverance; let us win freedom with our own hands! You have to
understand that the more prosperous, the more free and easy life becomes in
the West, the less ready Western man is to fight for fools who have allowed
themselves to be oppressed. And they are right; they haven’t opened their own
gates to the robber band. We have deserved our regime and leaders; we got
ourselves into this mess, and we must get ourselves out of it.”
“Their turn will come.”
“Of course their turn will come. There is a destructive force in prosperity. To
prolong it for a year, a day, a man will sacrifice not only all that belongs to
others but all that is sacred. He will defy the dictates of common prudence.
They fattened Hitler, they fattened Stalin, gave them half of Europe each; now
it’s China’s turn. They’ll gladly surrender Turkey, if that will allow them to
postpone general mobilization by as much as a week. They will perish; of
course they will. But we may perish first.”
“Yes.”
“The trouble with pinning our hopes on the Americans is that it eases our
conscience and weakens our will; we win the right not to struggle, the right to
submit, to take the line of least resistance and gradually degenerate. I do not
agree with those who claim that over the years our people have begun to see
more clearly, that something is maturing in them. Some say that it is impossible
to oppress a whole people indefinitely. That’s a lie! It is possible! We can see
for ourselves how our people have degenerated, how uncouth they have
become, how indifferent they are not only to the fate of the country, not only to
the fate of their fellows, but even to their own fate and that of their children.
Indifference, the organism’s last self-preservative reaction, has become our
defining characteristic. Hence also the popularity of vodka—unprecedented
even by Russian standards. This is the terrible indifference of the man who
sees his life not cracked, not chipped, but shattered, so fouled up that only
alcoholic oblivion makes living still worthwhile. If vodka were prohibited,
Revolution would break out immediately. But while he can charge forty-four
rubles for a liter that costs ten kopecks to make, the Communist Shylock will
not be tempted to enact a dry law.”
Nerzhin did not react, did not stir. Gerasimovich could hardly see his face in
the dim light from the lights around the camp, reflected from the ceiling.
Although he knew nothing about this man at all, he had chosen to share with
him thoughts that even bosom friends would not dare whisper to each other in
that country.
“Corrupting the people took only thirty years. Restoring them to health will
take—how long? Three hundred years? More? That is why we must hurry.
Given the impossibility of a popular Revolution, the harm done by pinning our
hopes on help from the outside, there remains only one way out: a palace
revolt, pure and simple. As Lenin used to say, ‘Give us an organization of
Revolutionaries, and we will turn Russia upside down!’ They threw together
such an organization, and they did turn Russia upside down!”
“God forbid!”
“I don’t think the creation of such an organization would be difficult for us,
with the knowledge of people we have acquired in jail and our ability to pick
out traitors at a glance; you and I, for instance, know that we can confide in
each other, though we have never talked before. It would take only three to five
thousand courageous and quick-thinking men able to handle weapons, plus a
few intellectuals—”
“Like those making the atom bomb. . .?”
“We would establish links with the military chiefs—”
“Those puffed-up chickens!”
“To ensure their benevolent neutrality. And we would need to take out only
Stalin, Molotov, Beria, and a few others. And immediately announce by radio
that the whole of the upper, middle, and lower strata remain in place.”
“Remain in place? And is that your elite?”
“For the time being! Temporarily. That is the peculiar feature of totalitarian
countries; it is difficult to carry out a coup, but once you have, ruling them
could not be easier. Macchiavelli said that the day after you expel the sultan,
you can worship Christ in all the mosques.”
“Don’t jump to conclusions! We can’t be sure who leads and who is led;
does the sultan lead them, or do they lead him without realizing it? As for the
supposed neutrality of those wild pigs of generals, who drove whole divisions
onto minefields just to save themselves from the penal battalion. . . ! They’ll
tear anyone to ribbons to defend their sty! And then again Stalin will escape by
a subterranean passage. . . . And as for your five thousand men of action, if they
haven’t been turned in by informants already, they’ll be machine-gunned from
listening posts. And anyway,” Nerzhin said impatiently, “there aren’t another
five thousand like you, not in Russia! It’s only men in prison, not so-called free
men with families to care for, who can think so boldly, act so uninhibitedly,
and contemplate such sacrifices. But, of course, prison is just the place from
which nothing can be achieved! You invited me to pick holes in your scheme.
Well, it consists of nothing but holes! Our overweening physicists and
mathematicians need to learn that social activity also requires special study
and special skills. You can’t describe it in mathematical terms. But it isn’t just
that! It isn’t just that!” (His voice was becoming too loud for the silence of the
dark stairway.) “Alas, you’ve chosen the wrong person to advise you! I simply
don’t believe that anything good and durable can be constructed on this earth of
ours. How can I set about advising you when I can’t disentangle myself from
my own doubts?”
Icily calm, Gerasimovich reminded him of Auguste Comte’s assertion, before
spectral analysis was invented, that mankind would never discover the
chemical composition of the stars. Which they promptly did!
“When you stride along in the exercise yard with your army coat flapping,”
he said, “you seem quite different.”
Nerzhin hesitated. He remembered what Spiridon had said yesterday
—“Killing wolves is right, eating people isn’t”—and Spiridon asking an
airplane to drop an atom bomb on him. His naive wisdom could be
overpowering, but Nerzhin resisted it as best he could.
“Well, I get carried away sometimes. But your plan requires serious thought,
and I can’t express myself fully all at once. Do you remember Anatole France’s
story about the old woman of Syracuse? She prayed to the gods to grant the
island’s hated tyrant a long life, because experience had taught her of old that
each successive tyrant was more cruel than his predecessor. Yes, our present
regime is vile, but how can you be sure that what you want will be any better?
Maybe it will be worse. No, you say, just because you want it to be better. But
maybe those before you wanted things to be better. They sowed rye, and what
came up was goosefoot. Forget about our Revolution! You can look back . . .
twenty-seven centuries! Over all those twists and turns in the meaningless
journey, from the hill where the she-wolf suckled the twins, from the valley of
olives where the wonder-working dreamer rode on an ass, to our own thrilling
heights, our own grim gorges, through which only self-propelled cannons grind
their way in single file, to our icy mountain passes where, at seventy degrees
below, the freezing wind of Oymyakon blows through convicts’ jackets. I can’t
see why we’ve struggled all this way, shoving one another over precipices.
Poets and prophets have hymned through the centuries the shining heights of the
future. Fanatics that they are, have they forgotten that on the heights hurricanes
howl, vegetation is sparse, there is no water, and you can easily fall and break
your neck? Shine a light, and you can see right here what may be the Castle of
the Holy Grail.”
“I’ve seen it.”
“Where a knight galloped up and beheld . . . nonsense! Nobody will ever
gallop up; nobody will behold anything! Give me my modest little valley
where there’s grass and water.”
“Back to the past?” Gerasimovich rapped out.
“If only I believed that there is any backward and forward in human history!
It’s like an octopus, with neither back nor front. For me there’s no word so
devoid of meaning as ‘progress.’ What progress, Illarion Palych? Progress
from what? To what? In those twenty-seven centuries, have people become
better? kinder? or at least a bit happier? No, they’ve become worse, nastier,
and unhappier! And all this thanks to beautiful ideas!”
“No progress? No progress?” Gerasimovich protested, forgetting the need
for caution and sounding younger than his years. “That’s unforgivable in a man
who’s had something to do with physics. Do you see no difference between
mechanical and electromagnetic speed?”
“What makes you think I need airplanes? There’s no healthier way to travel
than on foot or on horseback! What do I need radio for? To murder the playing
of great pianists? Or to send the order for my arrest to Siberia more quickly?
Let them send it by post chaise.”
“You must surely realize that energy will soon cost little or nothing, which
means abundance of material goods. We will unfreeze the Arctic, warm
Siberia, make the deserts green. In twenty or thirty years’ time, foodstuffs will
be as free as the air we breathe. Isn’t that progress?”
“Plenty doesn’t mean progress! My idea of progress is not material
abundance but a general willingness to share things in short supply! But you
won’t achieve any of that anyway! You won’t warm Siberia! You won’t make
the deserts bloom! It’ll all be blown to bloody hell by atom bombs! And
scattered to the winds by jet planes!”
“Try to look at it objectively . . . it hasn’t all been mistakes—we have crept
slowly upward. We have bloodied our tender mugs on jagged rocks, but
nonetheless we are now at the head of the pass. . . .”
“On Oymyakon!”
“Well, we aren’t burning one another at the stake anymore.”
“Why bother with firewood when you’ve got gas chambers?”
“Still, the times when the folk meeting settled disputes with the cudgel have
gone, and we have parliaments, in which reasoned argument prevails instead!
Quite primitive people, after all, won the habeas corpus act! And nobody
orders us to consign our wives to the overlord on our wedding night. You have
to be blind not to see that manners are becoming gentler, that reason is
prevailing over unreason. . . .”
“I don’t see it!”
“That our conception of what it means to be human is maturing!”
A prolonged ring from an electric bell sounded throughout the building. This
meant that it was 10:45, that all secret material should be handed in to be
locked away and the laboratories sealed.
Both men raised their heads into the faint lamplight from the prison grounds.
Gerasimovich’s pince-nez glittered like two diamonds.
“So, then, what’s your conclusion? Should we just let the planet rot? Don’t
you think that would be a pity?”
“It would be a pity,” Nerzhin whispered faintly, though there was no need to
whisper now. “I feel sorry for our planet. Better to die than live to see that.”
“Better to prevent it than to die,” Gerasimovich answered calmly. “But in
these crucial years of universal destruction or universal correction of mistakes,
what other way out do you suggest? Front-line officer! Veteran jailbird!”
“I don’t know . . . I don’t know.”
In the quarter light Nerzhin’s distress was evident.
“Before the atom bomb, the Soviet system, the ramshackle, hidebound,
vermin-ridden Soviet system was doomed; it could not have stood the test of
time. But if our side gets the bomb, it’s disaster. There is just one possibility
—”
“What?” Gerasimovich pressed him.
“Perhaps . . . the new age . . . with its globalized information. . . .”
“You’re the one who said you didn’t need radio!”
“No . . . they can jam it. I’m saying that maybe in the new age a new means
will be discovered for the Word to shatter concrete.”
“Completely contradicts the laws of resistance of materials.”
“Not to mention dialectical materialism. So what? Remember ‘In the
Beginning was the Word.’ So the Word is more ancient than concrete. The
Word is not to be taken lightly. Whereas your military coup is . . . just
impossible.”
“But in practical terms how do you envisage it?”
“I don’t know. I repeat—I don’t know. It’s a mystery. Mushrooms,
mysteriously, may not appear after the first or second shower, but sooner or
later rain brings them out in profusion. Only yesterday we could never have
believed that such monsters could emerge at all, but now they are everywhere.
In just the same way, noble people will suddenly spring up, and their word
will shatter concrete.”
“Before that happens, your noble people will be carried away in hampers
and baskets—weeded out, chopped up, short of a head. . . .”