Chapter-05-Boogie-Woogie

THE ACOUSTICS LABORATORY occupied a lofty, spacious room with several
windows that was chaotically cluttered with wooden racks and dazzling bright
white aluminum counters loaded with apparatus, assembly benches, newish
plywood cabinets from Moscow workshops, and comfortable writing desks
that had seen better days in the Berlin building of the Lorenz Radio Company.
Big bulbs in frosted fixtures shed a pleasant, diffused white light.
There was a soundproof acoustic chamber, with sides short of the ceiling, in
the far corner of the room. It looked unfinished: Its exterior was upholstered
with ordinary sacking stuffed with straw. The door, which was a yard thick but
hollow, like a circus clown’s dumbbells, was open at present, and the cloth
door curtain was thrown back to air the booth. Near the booth, rows of copper
sockets gleamed in the black lacquered panel of the central switchboard.
A diminutive fragile girl with a pale unsmiling face sat at a desk with her
back to the booth, holding a goat’s-hair shawl tight around her narrow
shoulders.
There were perhaps ten other people in the room, all men, all in identical
blue overalls, busying themselves by the light of the overhead fixtures and the
pools of brightness from swivel desk lamps (also of German origin), walking
back and forth, hammering, soldering, sitting at assembly benches and writing
desks. Three makeshift receivers mounted on aluminum panels, without casing,
provided a medley of jazz, piano music, and songs from the Eastern European
democracies.
Rubin walked slowly across the laboratory to his desk, holding the
Mongolian-Finnish dictionary and Hemingway down low. White cake crumbs
had lodged in his wavy beard.
The overalls issued to the prisoners were all cut from the same pattern, but
there were different ways of wearing them. One of Rubin’s buttons was
missing, his belt was slack, and loose folds sagged over his belly. A young
prisoner stood in his way. He was wearing exactly similar overalls but was
something of a dandy. His blue cloth belt was drawn tight around his slim
waist, and the top button of his overalls was undone to reveal a light blue silk
shirt, faded after many washes but held together around his neck by a bright tie.
This young man occupied the whole width of the side passageway on Rubin’s
route. His right hand lightly waved a hot soldering iron; he had rested his left
foot on a chair and his left elbow on his knee as he pored over the diagram of a
radio in an English-language journal that lay open on his bench, simultaneously
singing
Boogie-woogie, boogie-woogie.
Samba! Samba!
Rubin could not get by and stood there for a moment with an exaggeratedly
meek look on his face. The young man appeared not to notice him.
“Val, my friend, do you think you could pull in your rear foot a bit?”
Val answered, without looking up from his diagram, in short, sharp bursts.
“Lev Grigorievich! Back off! Get lost! Why do you turn up here in the
evening? What is there for you to do?”
He raised his light, boyish eyes to look at Rubin wonderingly. “What the hell
do we need a philologist for, anyway? Ha! ha! ha!” (three carefully separated
syllables). “You’re no engineer, after all! It’s a scandal!”
Comically protruding his fleshy lips and widening his eyes, Rubin lisped:
“Baby mine! I’ve known engineers who kept a soda-pop stall.”
“Not me!” Valentulya snapped. “I’m a first-class engineer, and don’t you
forget it!” He laid his soldering iron down on its wire stand and straightened
up, tossing back an unruly mass of silky hair the same color as the lump of
rosin on his bench. He was fresh complexioned, his face was unmarked by
experience, and his movements were boyish. It was impossible to believe that
he had graduated before the war, been in a German POW camp, spent some
time in Europe, and was now in his fifth year of imprisonment back in his
homeland.
Rubin sighed. “Without a duly witnessed reference from your Belgian boss,
our administration cannot—”
“Reference, nothing.” Valentin made a convincing show of indignation.
“How dense can you be? Surely you realize I’m mad about women!”
The grave little girl couldn’t help smiling.
Another prisoner in the place by the window to which Rubin was trying to
make his way stopped work and listened to Valentin approvingly.
“Your love, I think, is purely theoretical,” answered Rubin, his jaws moving
as though languidly chewing.
“And I madly love spending money!”
“Of which, however, you have—”
“So how can I be a bad engineer? Just think: To love women—different ones
all the time—you have to have a lot of money! To have a lot of money, you
have to earn a lot! To earn a lot of money, if you’re an engineer, you must have
a brilliant command of your special field! Ha-ha! You grow pale!”
Valentin’s elongated face was tilted provocatively at Rubin.
“Got it!” exclaimed the zek by the window, whose desk faced the young
woman’s.
“Got it, Lyovka! I’ve finally caught Valentin’s voice! It’s bell-like, that’s
what it is! I’ll write it down, shall I? A voice like that you could recognize
over any telephone. However much interference there was.”
He opened out a big sheet of paper, on which there were columns of names
with ruled squares beside them, and a tree diagram.
“God, what a load of bull!” Valentin made a gesture of disgust, seized his
soldering iron, and set the rosin smoking.
The passageway was clear. Rubin took his seat and also applied himself to
the classification of voices.
For some time they examined the chart together without speaking.
“We’re making progress, Glebka,” Rubin said at last. “Used in conjunction
with ‘visible speech,’ we’ve got a useful weapon here. Before very long we
shall know, you and I, what determines the quality of a voice on the telephone.
. . . What’s that on the radio?”
The loudest noise in the room was jazz, but where they were, a torrent of
piano music from the homemade receiver on the windowsill could be heard
above it. A single melody surfaced repeatedly, was swept away in the flood,
and reemerged only to be overwhelmed again.
“Beethoven’s Sonata No. 17,” Gleb replied. “One I’ve never really . . . Just
listen.”
They bent their heads toward the receiver, but the jazz made listening very
difficult.
“Valen-tine!” Gleb said. “Do us a favor! Show us how bighearted you are!”
“I’ve shown you already,” Valentin snapped. “Who set up that receiver for
you? If I unsolder your coil, that’ll be the end of it!”
The slip of a girl raised her eyebrows sternly and intervened. “Valentin
Martynych! It really is impossible! We can’t listen to three radios at once.
Switch yours off—please.”
(As it happened, Valentin’s radio was playing a slow foxtrot, and the girl
was enjoying it.)
“Serafima Vitalievna! This is monstrous!” Valentin bumped into an empty
chair, tilted it at an angle, and gesticulated as if he were addressing a public
meeting. “How can a normal healthy human being not like lively, invigorating
Western popular music? You are poisoned here with all sorts of rubbish. You
must, surely, have danced the “Blue Tango”? Surely you’ve seen Arkady
Raikin’s reviews? Ah, but you’ve never been in Europe either! How could you
possibly learn how to live? I do most earnestly advise you to fall in love with
somebody soon!”
He held forth over the chair back, not noticing the bitter lines round the young
woman’s mouth. “Somebody, anybody—ça dépend! Lights twinkling in the
night! The rustle of silken gowns!”
“He’s out of sync again!” Rubin said in alarm. “We must exercise our
authority.”
He reached behind Valentin’s back and switched off his radio.
Valentin spun around as if he had been stung.
“Lev Grigorievich! What gives you the right—?”
The limpid melody of Sonata No. 17 poured out unhindered, competing now
only with the rather crude song from the far corner.
Rubin’s frame was blissfully relaxed; his face was a pair of mild hazel eyes
over a beard with cake crumbs.
“Engineer Pryanchikov! Do you remember the Atlantic Charter? Have you
made your will yet? To whom have you left your bedroom slippers?”
Valentin’s face grew serious. He stared into Rubin’s eyes and asked quietly:
“Listen, what the hell d’you think you’re doing? Can’t a man feel free even in
prison? If there’s no freedom there, where can he expect to find it?”
One of the fitters called him over, and he went off despondently.
Rubin sank noiselessly into his chair, back-to-back with Gleb, and settled
down to listen, but the soothing cadences broke off suddenly, like a speech
interrupted in mid-sentence—and that was the modest and unostentatious
conclusion of Sonata No. 17.
Rubin swore obscenely, for Gleb’s ears only.
“Spell it,” Gleb answered, still sitting with his back to Rubin. “I can’t hear
you.”
“I said just my luck,” Rubin answered hoarsely, also without turning round.
“Now I’ve missed that sonata. I’d never heard it before.”
“Because you’re so disorganized, shall I ever get it into your head!” his
friend grumbled. “And a very good sonata it is, too! Did you notice how it
ends? No noise, not a whisper. It breaks off abruptly—and that’s that. Just like
in real life. . . . Where were you earlier?”
“With the Germans. Christmas party,” said Rubin with a laugh.
They carried on their conversation, invisible to each other, but almost resting
the backs of their heads on each other’s shoulders.
“Good for you.” Gleb thought a while. “I like your attitude to them. You
spend hours teaching Max Russian, though you’d be perfectly entitled to hate
them.”
“Hate them? No. But of course, the love I used to feel for them is clouded.
Max is a gentle chap, and no Nazi, but doesn’t even he share responsibility
with the hangmen? After all, he didn’t try to stop them, did he?”
“No. Just as you and I do nothing to stop Abakumov or Shishkin-Myshkin.”
“You know, Glebka, when you come to think of it, I’m as much Russian as
Jew. And as much a citizen of the world as I am a Russian.”
“I like that. Citizens of the world! It has a clean, unbloodied sound!”
“In other words we’re cosmopolitans. So they were right to lock us up.”
“Of course they were. Although you keep trying to convince the Supreme
Court of the opposite.”
The radio on the windowsill announced: “Logbook of Socialist Emulation in
half a minute.”
Half a minute was long enough for Gleb’s hand to move with unhurried
efficiency to the receiver and, before the announcer could get a single croak
out, switch it off as though wringing his neck. His face, no longer animated,
looked gray and tired.
Pryanchikov was grappling with another problem, calculating how to mount
a serial amplifier—and lightheartedly singing, “Boogie-woogie, boogiewoogie.
Samba! Samba!”