Chapter-13-He-Should-Have-Lied

NERZHIN WALKED BACK to the Acoustics Laboratory knowing that something
irreparable had happened but unaware as yet how serious it was. When he got
there, Rubin was missing. The others were all there, and Valentin, who was
busy in the passageway with a panel studded with dozens of radio valves,
flashed a glance at him.
“Steady there!” he said, one hand up, palm outward, like a policeman
stopping a car. “Why is there no current in my third stage? Maybe you can tell
me.”
Then he remembered: “Ah, yes, why did they send for you? Qu’est-ce qu’est
passé?”
Nerzhin was sullenly unforthcoming. “Cut the clowning, Valentin.” He could
not confess to this single-minded devotee of his own science that he had just
that moment renounced mathematics.
“If you have worries, let me prescribe dance music! Anyway, what have we
got to be miserable about? You’ve read that guy . . . what’s his name? The one
with the cigarette between his teeth—smoke a yard, throw two away . . . never
handles a spade himself, but urges everybody else to dig . . . you know who I
mean.
With police of my own to keep watch over me
Safe behind bars is the best place to be.
But another thought had claimed Val’s attention, and he was already giving
orders.
“Vadka! Plug in the oscilloscope, quick!”
Nerzhin went to his desk. He noticed, before sitting down, that Simochka
was agitated. She stared at him openly, and her faint eyebrows twitched.
“Where’s the Beard, then, Serafima Vitalievna?”
“Anton Nikolaevich sent for him as well. He wanted him in Number Seven,”
Simochka answered out loud. She moved over to the switchboard and spoke
still louder, so that everyone could hear: “Gleb Vikentich, come and check the
new word lists with me; we’ve still got half an hour.”
Simochka was one of the readers on the articulation project. There was a
standard measurement of audibility, and they were supposed to ensure that all
readers kept to it.
“How can I check you in all this noise?”
“Let’s go into the box.” She gave Nerzhin a significant look, picked up her
lists, which were written on drawing paper in India ink, and went over to the
box.
Nerzhin followed her.
He bolted the hollow yard-thick door, then squeezed through the little inner
door, and before he could pull down the blinds, Sima had thrown her arms
around his neck and was standing on tiptoe to kiss his lips.
He picked her up—she was very light; there was so little room that the toes
of her shoes knocked against the wall—sat on the only chair, in front of the
microphone, and lowered her onto his knees.
“Why did Anton send for you? What was wrong? How bad was it?”
“The amplifier isn’t on, is it? We don’t want this relayed over the
loudspeaker.”
“How bad was it?”
“What makes you think it was something bad?”
“I felt it must be the moment they rang for you. And I can tell by your face.”
“When are you going to call me Gleb?”
“I haven’t got used to the idea yet.”
The warmth of her unknown body flowed into his knees, through his hands,
and upward. Unknown, mysterious as any woman’s body would be to him after
so many years of soldiering and prison. And not everyone has a wealth of
youthful memories.
Simochka was remarkably light: Her bones might have been filled with air;
she could have been made of wax—she was as weightless as a bird that looks
bigger because of its feathers.
“Yes, my little girl. It looks as if . . . I will be moving shortly.”
She twisted around in his arms, letting her shawl slip from her shoulders, and
hugged him as hard as she could.
“Where to?”
“Why ask? We are people of the abyss. We disappear into the hole from
which we surfaced . . . back to the camp,” Gleb explained, as though teaching a
child.
“But why-y-y?” she wailed.
Gleb looked wonderingly into the eyes of this plain little girl whose love he
had won so unexpectedly and with so little effort. She was more anxious for
him than he was himself.
“Maybe I could have stayed on. But it would have been in another lab. We
still wouldn’t be together.”
As though this had been his reason for refusing in Anton’s office! But he was
stringing sounds together as mechanically as the Scrambler. In reality a
prisoner’s situation was so desperate that if Gleb had been transferred to
another lab, he would have tried to form a relationship with some other woman
working beside him, and if he had remained in the Acoustics Lab, any other
woman at the next desk, whatever she looked like, would have done just as
well as Simochka.
She, poor thing, pressed her little body to his and kissed him.
Why, all those weeks since their first kiss, had he spared Simochka,
begrudged her the illusion of future happiness? She was unlikely to find anyone
to marry her, and someone was sure to take advantage of her. She had thrown
herself at him . . . afraid and eager at once. Why shouldn’t he . . . before he
plunged back into the camps, where there would never be the slightest chance
. . .
“I wouldn’t like to go away without. . . . I want to take with me the memory
of. . . . What I mean is, I want to leave you with my child. . . .”
Embarrassed, she lowered her head and resisted his efforts to raise it with
his fingers.
“Little bird . . . don’t hide from me. Look up. Say something. Don’t you want
that?”
She threw back her head and spoke from deep inside herself. “I’ll wait for
you. How many years have you still got to do? Five? Well, I’ll wait five years
for you! But will you come back to me when you’re released?”
She was deliberately misunderstanding him, speaking as though he were not
already married. The long-nosed little thing was determined to marry him!
Gleb’s wife was living right there. In Moscow somewhere, but it might as
well have been on Mars.
Gleb had something else to think of, as well as Simochka, there on his knees,
and his wife on Mars—those reflections on the Russian Revolution hidden
away in his desk. They had cost him so much labor. Tentative sketches, but they
had evoked some of his finest thoughts.
They didn’t allow the smallest scrap of paper with writing on it to be taken
out of the sharashka. And if anything was found when they frisked him in transit
prison, he was bound to get an extra few years.
He had to lie. Make lying promises, as people always do. Then when he left
Marfino, he could leave his notes with Simochka for safekeeping.
But with those eyes fixed hopefully on him, he could not lie. He ignored her
question, avoided her gaze, opened her blouse, and began kissing her angular
shoulders.
“You asked me once what I keep writing all the time,” he said hesitantly.
“What is it, then?” Simochka asked curiously.
If she hadn’t chimed in, hadn’t seemed so eager, he would probably have
confided in her then and there. But her eagerness put him on guard. He had
lived so long in a world full of booby traps with cunningly concealed
tripwires.
Those loving, trustful eyes might well be working for the security officer.
He remembered how it had all started. She had put her cheek to his! It could
all be a put-up job!
“It’s just history,” he answered. “About the days of Peter the Great. But it’s
precious to me. I will carry on writing till Anton slings me out. But where can I
put it all when I leave?”
His eyes searched hers suspiciously.
“Why do you ask? You can give it to me. I’ll keep it safe. Keep on writing,
my dear.”
She had another question for him. “Tell me, is your wife very beautiful?”
The magneto-telephone connecting the booth with the lab rang suddenly.
Sima pressed the knob so that she could be heard at the other end but held the
receiver away from her mouth. Flushed, and with her clothes in disarray, she
began reading from the test card in a flat, expressionless voice.
“D’yer . . . fskop . . . shtap. . . . Yes, hello, what is it, Valentin Martynych?
Double diode-triode? There aren’t any G-G-7s, but I think there’s a 6-G-2. Let
me just finish this list, and I’ll be out there.”
She put down the phone and snuggled up to Gleb.
“I must go. Somebody will notice. Please let me go.”
But her plea was halfhearted.
He tightened his hold and pressed her whole body to his own.
“No! I let you go before, and I shouldn’t have. This time I’m not going to!”
“Please! They’re waiting for me! I have to close the lab!”
“I want you now! Right here!”
He kissed her.
“Not today, though!”
“So when?”
“Monday,” she said submissively. “I will be on duty, instead of Lira. Come
during the supper break. We will have a whole hour together. . . .”
By the time Gleb had opened the inner and unbolted the outer door, Sima had
buttoned herself up and combed her hair.
She went out first, looking cold and remote.