Chapter-19-The-Birthday-Hero

THE ROOM WAS NOTVERYBIG and not very high. It had two doors, and what
may once have been a window was now blocked up, flush with the wall. The
air, however, was fresh and pleasant (a special engineer was responsible for
its circulation and chemical purity).
A great deal of space was occupied by a low ottoman with flowery cushions.
Twin lamps with pink shades were attached to the wall above it.
On the ottoman lay a man whose likeness has been more often sculpted,
painted in oils, watercolors, gouache, and sepia; limned in charcoal, chalk, and
powdered brick; pieced together in a mosaic of road maker’s gravel, or
seashells, or wheat grains, or soybeans; etched on ivory; grown in grass;
woven into carpets; spelled out by planes flying in formation; recorded on film
. . . than any other face ever has been in the three billion years since the earth’s
crust was formed.
Now he was just lying there, with his legs in soft Caucasian boots like thick
stockings. He was wearing a service jacket with two big breast pockets and
two big side pockets—an old, well-worn tunic of the sort he had worn, some
of them khaki, some black, since the Civil War, perhaps in imitation of
Napoleon, and had changed for a marshal’s uniform only after Stalingrad.
The man’s name was declaimed by all the newspapers of the terrestrial
globe, mouthed by thousands of announcers in hundreds of languages,
thundered by public speakers in their exordia and perorations, piped by the
thin voices of Young Pioneers,
* intoned in prayers for his health by bishops.
This man’s name burned on the parched lips of prisoners of war and the
swollen gums of convicts. It had replaced the previous names of a multitude of
cities and squares, streets and avenues, palaces, universities, schools,
sanatoriums, mountain ranges, ship canals, factories, mines, state farms,
collective farms, warships, icebreakers, fishing boats, cooperative cobblers’
shops, nurseries—and a group of Moscow journalists had even suggested
renaming the Volga and the moon after him.
Yet he was only a little yellow-eyed old man with gingery (not pitch black,
as in his portraits), thinning (luxuriant according to his portraits) hair, with
deep pockmarks in a gray face and a sagging dewlap (these last features were
not portrayed at all), with uneven, blackened teeth, a mouth smelling of pipe
tobacco, and fat, moist fingers that left marks on documents and books.
Moreover, he was not feeling very well today: He had gotten tired and had
overeaten during the jubilee celebrations, there was a weight like a stone in his
stomach, and belching left a sour taste in his mouth. Salol and belladonna had
not helped, and he did not like taking purgatives. He hadn’t dined at all today
and had decided around midnight, quite early for him, to lie down for a bit.
Although the air was warm, his back and shoulders felt cold, and he had
covered them with a brown mohair shawl.
A deathly silence had flooded the house and grounds and all the world.
In this silence time seemed scarcely to stir, scarcely to crawl. It had to be
lived through like an illness, and every night he had to invent some business or
some distraction. It was easy enough to shut yourself off from the spatial
universe, refuse to move about in it. But it was impossible to shut yourself off
from time.
Right now he was paging through a little book in a stiff brown binding. He
looked with satisfaction at the photographs, dipped into the text, which he
knew almost by heart, and turned more pages. The book was designed to slip
comfortably into an overcoat pocket without bending; it could accompany
people wherever they went, whatever they did. It had a quarter of a thousand
pages, but they were sparsely covered with bold print so that even the
semiliterate and the aged could read them without fatigue. The title was
stamped on the cover in gilt letters: Iosif Vissarionovich Stalin: Short
Biography.
The honest and unpretentious words of this book sank irresistibly into the
human heart, bringing peace. The strategist of genius. His wisdom and
foresight. His iron will. From 1918 onward, he was in effect Lenin’s deputy.
(Yes, yes, I was!) When he became leader of the Revolutionary armies, he
found chaos and panic at the front. Stalin’s instructions formed the basis of
Frunze’s plan of operations. (True, true, that’s just how it was!) It was our
great good fortune that in the difficult years of the Fatherland War we were led
by a wise and experienced Leader, the Great Stalin. (Yes, the people had been
lucky!) Everybody knows the shattering power of Stalin’s logic, the crystal
clarity of his mind. (No need for false modesty, it’s all true.) His love for the
people. His sensitive concern for the people. His intolerance of pomp and
publicity. His extraordinary modesty. (Modesty, yes, that’s very true.)
His infallible knowledge of men had enabled the celebrant to collect a good
team of authors for his biography. But however thorough they are, however
they slave at it, no one else can write about your deeds, your leadership, your
qualities as cleverly, with as much feeling, and as truthfully as you can
yourself. So Stalin sometimes had to summon this or that member of the team
for a leisurely talk in order to inspect their manuscript, gently indicating where
they had gone wrong and suggesting improvements in the wording.
As a result the book was now a great success. This second edition had come
out in five million copies. For such a huge country? Not nearly enough. The
third edition must be boosted to ten million, or twenty. It must be on sale in
factories, schools, collective farms. It should be distributed to them directly,
according to the number of employees.
Nobody knew as well as Stalin did how much his people needed this book.
His people could not be left without continual instruction and edification. His
people must not be kept in uncertainty. The Revolution had left them orphaned
and godless, and that was dangerous. Stalin had spent twenty years doing his
best to correct that situation. This explained the millions of portraits throughout
the country (it was not Stalin himself who needed them; he was modest), the
constant thunderous repetition of his glorious name, the unfailing mention of
him in every article. The Leader himself had absolutely no need of all this; it
no longer gave him any pleasure; he had grown sick of it long ago; it was his
subjects who needed it, the simple Soviet people. As many portraits, as many
repetitions of his name as possible. But he himself must appear seldom and say
little: as though he were not always with them on this earth but at times in some
other place. That way there was no limit to their rapturous adoration.
It was not nausea, but a sort of heavy upward pressure from the stomach. He
took a feijoa from a bowl of peeled fruit.
Three days ago salvos had hailed his glorious seventieth birthday.
To the Caucasian way of thinking, a septuagenarian is still in his prime, able
to tackle a mountain, a horse, or a woman. And Stalin was still perfectly fit. He
simply had to live to ninety. He had set his heart on it. There was so much to be
done. True, one doctor had warned him about . . . never mind what, the man
had apparently been shot later. No, there was nothing seriously wrong with
him. He refused injections and therapy of any sort. He knew enough about
medicines to prescribe for himself. “Eat more fruit!” they told him. As if a
Caucasian needed to be told about fruit!
He sucked the pulp of the feijoa, screwing up his eyes. It left a faint tang of
iodine on his tongue.
Yes, he was perfectly fit, but he noticed certain changes as the years went by.
He had lost his hearty appetite. There was nothing he savored; eating had
begun to bore him. He no longer delighted in selecting wine for each dish.
Tipsiness simply gave him a headache. If Stalin sometimes sat over a meal half
the night with his minileaders, it was just to kill the long, empty hours, not
because he enjoyed the food. Women, too, were something he needed rarely
and never for long, although he had indulged himself freely after Nadya’s
death. They did not thrill him but left him feeling . . . dulled. Nor did sleep
bring relief as it had when he was younger: He woke up feeling weak and
muddleheaded and reluctant to rise.
Though he had decided to live to ninety, Stalin thought miserably, he
personally could expect no pleasure from the years ahead: He must simply
accept another twenty years of suffering for the sake of mankind at large.
This was how he had celebrated his birthday. On the evening of the
twentieth, Traicho Kostov had been done to death. Only when the dog’s eyes
glazed over could the real celebrations begin. On the twenty-first, Stalin had
been feted in the Bolshoi Theater, where Mao, Dolores, and other comrades
had made speeches. Then there had been a great banquet. Still later, an intimate
banquet. They had drunk old wine from Spanish cellars, wine once sent in
payment for arms. Then he and Lavrenty privately had drunk Kakhetinskoye
and sung Georgian songs. On the twenty-second, there was a big diplomatic
reception. On the twenty-third, he had seen himself portrayed on screen in The
Battle of Stalingrad, Part II, and on the stage in The Unforgettable 1919.
He had liked both productions, although they left him exhausted. His role not
only in the Fatherland War but in the Civil War, too, was more and more
truthfully portrayed nowadays. Everyone could see what a great man he had
been even then. Stage and screen now showed people how often he had
warned and corrected the rash and superficial Lenin. What noble words the
playwright had put in his mouth: “Every toiler has the right to say what he
thinks!” And how cleverly the scriptwriter had handled that night scene with
his Friend. Although Stalin no longer had such a close and devoted friend,
because people were always so insincere, so treacherous. And, as it happened,
he had never had such a friend, no, never, but when he saw it on screen, Stalin
felt a lump in his throat (what a writer! that’s what I call a writer!): It was as if
he had always wanted such a truthful and selfless Friend, someone to whom
you could say out loud the thoughts that came to you in the long night hours.
But you couldn’t possibly have such a Friend, because he would have to be
very, very great. And if he were as great as that, where would he live? What
would his job be?
As for all those others, from Vyacheslav Stone-Bottom to Nikita the Gopakdancer,
** how could anyone take them seriously? You could die of boredom
sitting at the table with them. Not one of them ever came out with a clever
remark, and whenever you made a point, they all agreed immediately. At one
time Stalin had a soft spot for Voroshilov, because of Tsaritsyn and the Polish
campaign and because he had reported the meeting of those traitors Zinoviev
and Kamenev with Frunze in the cave at Kislovodsk. But Voroshilov was a
stuffed dummy with an army cap and medals, not a human being.
There was no one he now remembered as a friend. No one of whom he could
remember more good than bad.
He had, and could have, no friend, but the common people all loved their
Leader and were ready to sacrifice life and soul for him. That was made clear
by the newspapers, the cinema, and the exhibition of birthday presents. He
rejoiced to think that the Leader’s birthday had become a nationwide festival.
So many birthday messages had arrived, greetings from institutions, from
organizations, from factories, from individual citizens. Pravda had asked
permission to publish them, not all at once but in two columns daily.
Publication would extend over several years, but that was all to the good.
As for the presents, ten galleries in the Museum of the Revolution could not
house them. So that the citizens of Moscow could view them freely in the
daytime, Stalin paid a visit by night. The work of thousands and thousands of
craftsmen, the finest gifts earth could offer, stood, lay, or hung before him, but
here, too, the same cold indifference, the same apathy had gripped him. What
good were all these presents to him? He was soon bored with them. Once
again, there in the museum, an unpleasant memory stirred at the back of his
mind, but as so often recently the thought remained vague. He knew only that it
was unpleasant. Stalin walked through three galleries without choosing
anything, pausing for a moment at the big television set with an engraved plate
reading “To Great Stalin from the Chekists.” This, the biggest of all Soviet
television sets, and the only one of its kind, had been made at Marfino. Stalin
inspected it briefly, turned on his heel, and left.
But by and large it had been a marvelous occasion. His proud record! his
victories! achievements such as no political leader in the world could equal!
Yet for him this triumphant occasion had been hollow.
It was as though something lodged in his chest nagged and galled him.
He took another bite of the feijoa and sucked it.
Yes, the people loved him, but the people’s faults were innumerable. Left to
itself, the people was good for nothing. You need only ask yourself who was to
blame for the retreat in 1941. Who retreated? The people, who else?
That was why he ought not to be celebrating, or lying around, but getting
down to work. Thinking.
Thinking—that was his duty. At once his lot and his punishment. He had to
live another two decades, like a prisoner serving a twenty-year sentence, with
no more than eight hours’sleep in the twenty-four; that was all he could
manage. All those other hours he must struggle through, as though he were
dragging his aging, vulnerable body over sharp stones.
Hardest of all for Stalin were morning and early afternoon. While the sun
was rising, shining merrily, reaching its zenith, Stalin slept in darkness,
shuttered, secluded, secret. He awoke when the sun was already declining,
losing strength, toward the end of its short one-day life. Stalin had breakfast at
about three o’clock in the afternoon but began to come to life only toward
evening, when the sun was setting. In the hours between, his brain was
warming up, waking sullenly, distrustfully; he could make only negative and
prohibitive decisions. Dinner began at 10:00 p.m. A few favored members of
the Politburo or foreign Communists were usually invited. Four or five hours
were painlessly killed over a steady succession of dishes, drinks, jokes, and
discussions, and at the same time his mind picked up speed and the impetus for
the creative legislative thinking of the second half of the night was generated.
All the major decrees that kept the great state on course took shape in Stalin’s
head after 2:00 a.m. and never later than dawn.
That time had come around again, and a decree conspicuously lacking in the
body of the law was ripening. He had made fast forever almost everything in
the land, stopped all movement, dammed all currents, all two hundred million
knew their place, but the kolkhoz system had sprung a leak. This was all the
stranger because the general situation on the farms was conspicuously good—
witness the films and novels on the subject—and anyway Stalin often talked to
collective farmers himself on the platforms of rallies and congresses.
Nonetheless, like the perspicacious and unceasingly self-critical statesman he
was, Stalin had forced himself to look still deeper. One of the obkom
***
secretaries (subsequently shot, he believed) had let slip that the farms had one
dark side: Old men and women enrolled in the thirties worked ungrudgingly,
but an unconscientious element among the young tried when they left school to
obtain passports by fraud and to sneak off to the towns.
Education! What a mess they had got into with, first universal seven-year,
then universal ten-year education, with those “children of cooks” who now
went to university. Lenin in his irresponsible way had muddled matters,
recklessly littering the place with promises, which had since become a
crippling burden to his successor, to Stalin. “Any cook must be able to
administer the state,” but how had Lenin pictured this in concrete terms? Did
he mean that the cook, instead of cooking on Fridays, would take her seat on
the oblast executive committee? A cook was a cook; her job was to prepare
dinner. Governing people was a rare skill, a task that could be entrusted only
to special cadres, cadres specially selected, trained, and tempered, highly
disciplined. Management of the cadres themselves must rest in a single pair of
hands, the practiced hands of the Leader.
Why not write it into the statutes of each collective farm that since the land
belongs to it in perpetuity, everyone born in a particular village automatically
acquires membership in the farm at birth? Represent this as a right and an
honor. Launch a public-relations campaign immediately: “A Further Step
Along the Road to Communism,” “Youth’s Inheritance—the Collective
Granary,” . . . well, the writers would find the best way to put it.
Somehow his mind was not on his work today. He felt unwell.
There were four short knocks, or rather not so much knocks as a muffled
sound, as if a dog was pawing the door.
Stalin pulled a lever near his couch, the safety catch clicked, and the door
opened slightly. No curtain hung in front of it (Stalin did not like anything that
hung loosely, anything with folds in which someone could hide), and he could
see the bare door opening just wide enough to admit a dog. It was, however, at
the upper, not the lower, end of the gap that a head appeared; that of the bald
though still-young-looking Poskryobyshev, who wore a permanent expression
of honest devotion and unbounded eagerness to serve.
Though it worried him to see the Boss lying down, half covered with the
mohair shawl, he did not ask about his health (Stalin disliked such questions),
but said almost in a whisper: “Iosif Vissarionovich, you made an appointment
with Abakumov for half past two. Will you be wanting to see him?”
Iosif Vissarionovich unbuttoned the flap of his breast pocket and pulled out a
watch on a chain (like all those of his generation he detested wristwatches).
It was not yet 2:00 a.m.
The heavy lump was still there in his stomach. He didn’t feel like getting up
and changing his clothes. But he could not relax his grip on any of them; the
slightest weakening would be felt at once.
“We’ll see,” said Stalin, wearily blinking. “I’m not sure.”
“He might as well come. He can wait,” Poskryobyshev said, nodded three or
four times, then froze again, looking expectantly at the Boss. “Have you any
further instructions, Iossarionych?” No instructions could be read into the
languid, lifeless gaze that Stalin turned on him. But Poskryobyshev’s question
had struck a sudden spark from his erratic memory, and he asked something that
he had intended to ask long ago but kept forgetting.
“What about the cypresses down in the Crimea? Are they being cut down?”
“They are, Iossarionych.” Poskryobyshev nodded confidently, as though he
had been expecting this very question and had just rung through to the Crimea
to inquire. “Around Massandra and Livadia a lot of them have been felled
already, Iossarionych!”
“Have a report sent in just the same. In code. Make sure there’s no
sabotage.” The unhealthy yellow eyes of the All-Powerful looked troubled.
One of his doctors had told him earlier in the year that cypresses were bad
for his health and that he needed air impregnated with the aroma of
eucalyptuses. Whereupon Stalin had given orders for the Crimean cypresses to
be felled, and eucalyptus saplings to be imported from Australia.
Poskryobyshev acknowledged his orders and also undertook to find out what
was happening about the eucalyptuses.
“Right,” said Stalin, satisfied. “You can go for now, Sasha.”
Poskryobyshev nodded, backed toward the door, inclined his head once
more, then withdrew it and closed the door. Iosif Vissarionovich operated the
remote-control lock again. Clutching the shawl, he turned onto his other side.
And continued paging through his Biography.
But recumbency, a slight chill, and indigestion had lowered his resistance,
and he surrendered helplessly to dark thoughts. What rose before him now was
not the dazzling and preordained success of his policies but his ill luck in life
and all the enemies, all the obstacles with which fate had sought to bar his
way.
* Young Pioneers: A mass organization established in 1922 for Soviet youths
from ten to fifteen years old.
** Vyacheslav Stone-Bottom and Nikita the Gopak-dancer: Stalin refers to two
of his principal deputies. Vyacheslav Molotov was known to sit working as
long as his boss required; Nikita Khrushchev, of peasant stock, was alleged to
have been repeatedly asked by Stalin to perform the Gopak squat dance.
*** Obkom: Soviet shorthand for an Oblast Committee of the Communist Party.