Chapter-53-The-Ark

AT6:00 P.M. ON SUNDAY, even in the sharashka, it was time to stop work till
the next morning. There was no way of avoiding this tiresome interruption in
the prisoners’ work because the free workers would do only one shift on
Sundays. It was an odious tradition, but even majors and lieutenant colonels
were powerless against it, for they too had no wish to work on Sunday
evenings. Only Mamurin, the Man in the Iron Mask, dreaded those empty
evenings, when the free workers went away, and the zeks, who in spite of
everything were in some sense people, were herded into their pens and locked
in and he was left to wander alone through the deserted hallways, past sealed
doors, to languish in his cell with washbasin, cabinet, and cot for company.
Mamurin had tried hard to get permission for Number Seven to work on
Sunday evenings, but he could not overcome the conservatism of the special
prison authorities who did not want to double guards inside the prison.
And so it came about that 280 prisoners, flouting all conventional wisdom
and regulations, spent Sunday evenings brazenly resting.
Their rest was of such a kind that anyone unused to it might have thought it a
torment invented by the devil. The darkness outside and the need to be
especially vigilant on Sundays made it impossible for the prison staff to
arrange exercise periods in the yard or film shows in the big shed. After a
year’s correspondence with all the higher powers, it was also decided that
musical instruments such as the accordion, guitar, balalaika, and harmonica—
and a fortiori those of larger format—were forbidden in the sharashka, since
their combined noise might be useful to prisoners trying to tunnel through the
stone foundations. (Operations officers were continually trying to find out
through informers whether any prisoner had a homemade panpipe or tin
whistle, and anyone who played on comb and paper was called into the office
and his offense specially recorded.) Obviously there could be no thought of
allowing radios or the most pathetic little record player in the prisoners’
quarters.
True, prisoners were allowed to make use of the prison library. But the
special prison had no funds for buying books or a bookcase. They simply
appointed Rubin prison librarian (he volunteered, hoping to get his hands on
some good books), presented him with a hundred or so disheveled and
collapsing volumes, among them Turgenev’s Mumu, Stasov’s Letters, and
Mommsen’s History of Rome, and told him to circulate them among the
prisoners. The prisoners had long since read all these books or had no desire
at all to read them and had to beg reading matter from the female free workers,
which provided the operations officers with rewarding opportunities for
searches.
For their leisure hours the prisoners had at their disposal ten rooms in two
stories, two hallways, the upper and the lower, a narrow wooden stairway
between the floors, and a bathroom under the stairway. Rest meant that
prisoners could without restriction lie on their beds (and even sleep, if they
could drop off in all that hubbub), sit on their beds, or walk around the room or
from room to room (wearing nothing but their underclothes if they so wished),
smoke as much as they liked in the hallways, argue about politics in the
presence of stoolies, and use the bathroom without permission or hindrance.
(Only those who have spent a long time in jail, relieving themselves twice
daily on a word of command, can appreciate this last immortal freedom.) What
their rest period amounted to was that their time was their own, not the state’s.
And that was enough to make them regard it as genuine.
For the prisoners a day off meant that the heavy iron doors were locked from
the outside, after which no one came in to summon a prisoner or haul him out.
For those few short hours not a sound, not a word, not an image could filter
through from the outside world to trouble a man’s mind. That was what their
day of rest meant—the whole world outside, the universe with all its stars, the
planet with its continents, capital cities with their blazing lights, the whole
state with some at their banquets and others working voluntary extra shifts,
sank into oblivion, turned into an ocean of darkness barely discernible through
the barred windows by the dead yellow half-light from the lights in the prison
grounds.
Flooded within by the MGB’s inextinguishable electric light, the old
seminary church was like an ark, with sides four bricks and a half thick,
floating serenely and aimlessly through that black ocean of human destinies and
human errors, leaving behind fading rivulets of light from its portholes.
During that Sunday night the moon might crack in two, new alps might rear up
in the Ukraine, the ocean might swallow Japan, a universal deluge might begin,
but the prisoners locked up in the ark would know nothing of it till the morning
roll call. Nor could they be disturbed during those hours by telegrams from
relatives, tiresome telephone calls, a child taken ill with diphtheria, or
nocturnal arrest.
Those who sailed on in the ark were weightless and had only weightless
thoughts. They were neither hungry nor full. They knew no happiness and so
felt no anxiety about losing it. Their heads were not busy with trivial
professional concerns, intrigues, the struggle for promotion; their shoulders
were not burdened with worries about a place to live, fuel, bread, and clothing
for their children. Love, which has brought man delight and torment from the
beginning of time, could neither thrill nor distress them. Their sentences were
so long that not one of them as yet gave any thought to the years after his
release. Men of remarkable intelligence, education, and experience of life, they
had nonetheless been too devoted to their families to leave much of themselves
for their friends, but here they belonged only to their friends.
Light from glaring bulbs, reflected from white ceilings and whitewashed
walls, pierced their enlightened heads with thousands of rays.
From here, from the ark forging confidently ahead through the darkness, the
erratically meandering stream of accursed history was clearly visible—visible
in its entirety, as though from an immense height, yet in detail, down to the last
little pebble on the streambed, just as though they had plunged into its waves.
During those Sunday evening hours, matter and body could be forgotten. The
spirit of masculine friendship and philosophy hovered beneath the canvas vault
of the ceiling.
Perhaps this was the bliss all the philosophers of antiquity had striven in
vain to identify.