Chapter-27-A-Bit-of-Methodology

MEANWHILE THEYSAWED AWAY. Their bodies grew hot; their faces glowed;
their jackets had long ago been tossed onto the unsawed timber; freshly cut
logs were piling up around the sawhorse. And still there was no ax.
“Maybe that’s enough?” Nerzhin asked. “We’ll never chop all that.”
Sologdin agreed. “Let’s have a rest.” The blade of the saw twanged as he put
it aside.
They whipped their caps off. Steam rose from Nerzhin’s mop and Sologdin’s
thinning hair. They took deep breaths. The air seemed to search out the mustiest
corners of their insides.
“But if they send you off to a camp now,” Sologdin asked, “how will that
affect your work on the New Time of Troubles?” (He meant the Revolution.)
“How can it? I’m not exactly pampered here. Having a single line of it in my
possession means risking the hole whether I’m there or here. I can’t get a
permit to use the public library here anyway. I probably won’t be let into the
archives as long as I live. As for clean paper, even in the taiga I can find birch
bark or pine bark. And however often they frisk me, they can’t confiscate my
real assets; the suffering I’ve gone through and watched others experience
provides a wealth of historical insights. Don’t you agree?”
“Splendid!” Sologdin answered heartily. “I can see you’re learning! So
you’ve decided not to spend fifteen years reading all the books on the subject
first?”
“More or less, and anyway where would I get them?”
“Let’s have no ‘more or less’!” Sologdin loudly admonished him.
“Remember, the idea is the thing! A powerful initial idea determines the
success of any activity. And the idea must be your own! An idea, like a living
tree, bears fruit only if it develops naturally. Books, and other people’s
opinions, are scissors; they can cut through the life of your idea. You have to
begin by thinking it through for yourself. Only then should you check it against
what you find in books.”
Sologdin looked searchingly at his friend.
“What about the thirty little red volumes—are you still going to read them
from beginning to end?”
“Yes! To understand Lenin is to understand half the truth about the
Revolution. And where did he reveal himself more clearly than in his books?
Besides, I can find them anywhere, in any public reading room.”
Sologdin looked dark, put his cap on, and perched awkwardly on the
sawhorse.
“You are a madman. You’ll fill your head with nonsense. It’ll get you
nowhere. It’s my duty to warn you.”
Nerzhin also took his cap from the sawhorse and perched on the pile of logs.
“Don’t let your profession down. Think like a mathematician. Apply the
nodal points method. How is any unknown phenomenon investigated? How is
any undrawn curve plotted? All at once or point by point?”
“All right, all right!” Nerzhin didn’t like beating about the bush. “I see what
you mean.”
“So why not apply this to a . . . person from real life?” (Nerzhin mentally
translated it into the “Language of Apparent Clarity”: a historical person.)
“Get an overall view of Lenin’s life, spot the main breaks in gradualness, the
sharp changes of direction, and read only what relates to them. How did he
behave at those moments? And there you have the whole man. The rest you
don’t need at all.”
“So when I asked you what should be done with professional criminals, I
was inadvertently applying the nodal points method to you?”
An evasive grin narrowed Sologdin’s bright eyes. He thoughtfully draped his
jacket over his shoulders and changed his position on the sawhorse but looked
no more comfortable.
“You have upset me, Gleb, my boy. You may have to leave here any day now.
We will have to part. One of us will perish. Or both of us. Will we live to see
the day when people can meet and talk openly? I would like to have time to
share with you . . . at least some of the conclusions I have reached about ways
of unifying the aim, the agent, and his work. They might be of use to you. Of
course, my inarticulateness makes it very difficult for me; I’ll put it rather
clumsily. . . .”
That was typical of Sologdin! Before dazzling you with his ideas, he felt
compelled to disparage himself.
Nerzhin took over, to speed things up.
“Don’t forget your poor memory! And the fact that you are ‘a vessel of error.’
”
“Quite so,” Sologdin confirmed with a fleeting smile. “Well, then, knowing
my own imperfection, I have spent many years in prison forging rules for
myself that gird my will with a band of iron. These rules are a sort of general
survey of ways of approaching work.”
Methodology, thought Nerzhin, translating as usual from the Language of
Ultimate Clarity. His shoulders were getting cold, and he, too, draped his
jacket around himself.
The light was growing stronger, and they could see that it would soon be time
to leave the firewood and report for the morning roll call. In the distance, in
front of the special prison’s staff building, they caught glimpses of the Marfino
exercise yard under a canopy of magically whitened limes. Towering over the
other strollers were the thin, upright figure of the fifty-year-old artist
Kondrashov-Ivanov and the bent but also very lanky Merzhanov, once Stalin’s
court architect but now forgotten. They also saw Lev Rubin, who had
overslept, trying to break through to the woodpile. The guard barred his way
because it was too late.
“Look, there’s Lyovka with his beard in a tangle.”
They both burst out laughing.
“Well, then, would you like me to tell you one or two of the rules each
morning?”
“Go ahead. We can try it.”
“Here’s an example: How should one behave in the face of difficulties?”
“Not be downhearted?”
“That’s not enough.”
Sologdin gazed past Nerzhin and out beyond the prison zone at the low, thick
underbrush, powdered with frost and faintly tinged with the uncertain pink light
from the east. The sun was undecided whether to appear or not. Sologdin’s
face, grave and lean, with its fair, curly beard and fair, clipped mustache, was
somehow reminiscent of Alexander Nevsky.
*
“What should be our attitude to difficulties?” he said solemnly. “In the sphere
of the unknown, we should regard difficulties as a hidden treasure! As a rule,
the more difficult things are, the more they can help us. It is worth less if the
difficulties arise from your struggle with yourself. But when they come from
the increasing resistance of the object, it’s splendid!” (The rosy glow of dawn
seemed to pass over Alexander Nevsky’s face, carrying with it the reflection of
difficulties as beautiful as the sun.)
“The most promising path for investigation is that on which the greatest
external meets the smallest internal resistance. Setbacks must be regarded as
showing the need for further application of effort and concentration of the will.
If great exertions have already been made, setbacks are a still greater cause for
rejoicing! They mean that our crowbar has struck the iron treasure chest! And
overcoming increased difficulties is all the more valuable in that the agent
grows in stature with each setback, grows in proportion to the difficulties he
meets!”
“Bravo! Well said!” Nerzhin called out from his log pile.
“That doesn’t mean that we can never forgo further effort. Our crowbar may
have struck a stone instead. Once convinced of that, or if your resources are
insufficient, or in violently hostile surroundings, you may even abandon the
goal itself. But it is important to examine your reasons meticulously!”
“Now, there I’m not sure I’m with you,” Nerzhin said slowly. “What
surroundings are more hostile than prison? Where could our resources be less
adequate? But we go on doing what we must. To give up now might mean
giving up forever.”
Dawn tints had lingered on the shrubs until unbroken gray cloud extinguished
them.
Sologdin looked down absently at Nerzhin, as though withdrawing his eyes
from a message graven on tablets of stone. Then he began to speak again,
almost chanting:
“Now hear the rule of the last few inches! The region of the final inches!
What that means is immediately obvious in the Language of Utter Clarity. The
work is nearly completed, the goal is almost attained, everything seems to have
been mastered and finalized, but the quality of the thing is not quite right.
Finishing touches are necessary, perhaps further research. At that moment of
weariness, the temptation to abandon the work without perfecting it is
particularly strong. Work in the sector of the last few inches is very, very
complicated but also particularly valuable because it is carried out by the most
perfect means! The rule for the last few inches amounts to just this: Do not give
up work at this point! Do not put it off, or the agent’s current of thought will be
diverted from the region of the last few inches! And do not begrudge time spent
on it, knowing that the goal is not speedy completion but the achievement of
perfection!”
“Good, very good,” Nerzhin whispered.
In a quite different voice, a sarcastic voice, Sologdin said:
“What’s the idea, Junior Lieutenant? This isn’t like you. Why have you been
so long with the ax? We won’t have time to chop the wood now.”
The moonfaced junior lieutenant, Nadelashin, had been a sergeant major not
so long ago. After his promotion to officer rank, the prisoners in the sharashka,
who were quite fond of him, had taken to calling him “junior.”
Mincing toward them, panting comically, he handed over the ax with a guilty
smile and said eagerly:
“No, please, Sologdin, please chop the wood! There’s none at all in the
kitchen; there’s nothing to cook dinner with. You can’t imagine how much work
I have without your making me more.”
Nerzhin snorted. “Eh? What? Work? Junior Lieutenant! You really call what
you do work?”
The duty officer turned his moon face to Nerzhin. Knitting his brow, he
recited from memory: “ ‘Work is the overcoming of resistance.’ When I walk
around quickly, I’m overcoming air resistance, so I, too, work.” He tried to
look impassive, but his face lit up in a smile when Sologdin and Nerzhin both
roared with laughter in the frosty air. “Please, please chop the wood!”
He turned and minced off toward the staff building, outside which at that very
moment they caught a glimpse of the smart, overcoated figure of his superior,
Lieutenant Colonel Klimentiev.
“Gleb, my boy,” said Sologdin in surprise. “Do my eyes deceive me? Is that
Klimentiadis?” (That year there had been a lot in the newspapers about Greek
detainees who sent telegrams from their cells to parliaments everywhere and to
the UN describing the hardships they were suffering. In the sharashka, where
prisoners could not always send as much as a postcard to their wives, let alone
write to foreign parliaments, it had become the practice to change the name of
prison officers so that they sounded Greek—Myshinopoulos, Klimentiadis,
Shikinidi.)
“What brings Klimentiadis here on a Sunday?”
“Don’t you know? Six men are being taken to see family.”
Nerzhin had heard about this earlier. Now his whole being, so full of light
and joy while he was sawing wood, was suffused with bitterness again. It was
nearly a year since he had been allowed a visit and eight months since he had
put in an application, which had been neither approved nor rejected. One
reason for this was that, not wanting his wife to lose her graduate student
status, he had not given her address at the dormitory but instead asked for
letters to be sent poste restante. The prison would not accept this. Because he
was so intensely introspective, Nerzhin was free from envy. Neither the wages
nor the rations of more deserving prisoners disturbed his peace of mind. But
some people had visits every couple of months, while his vulnerable wife had
pined and hovered outside the fortresslike walls of prisons, and the thought of
this injustice was torture to him.
Moreover, today was his birthday.
“They are, are they?” Sologdin was just as bitterly envious. “They take the
stoolies down there every month. And I will never see my Nina again. . . .”
(Sologdin never used the words “until the end of my sentence” because he
had reason to know that prison sentences do not necessarily have an end.)
He watched Klimentiev stand talking to Nadelashin for a minute or two, then
enter headquarters.
He spoke suddenly and rapidly: “Gleb! Look, your wife knows mine. When
you go in to see her, try to ask Nadya to look Nina up and tell her just three
little things from me: He loves you! he worships you! he adores you!”
“You know they’ve refused me a visit; what’s gotten into you?” Nerzhin,
taking careful aim to split a log clear in two, did not hide his annoyance.
“Just take a look!”
Nerzhin looked around. “Junior” was coming toward them and beckoning to
him. Dropping the ax and brushing against the propped-up saw with his jacket
so that it fell to the ground with a twang, Gleb ran like a little boy.
Sologdin’s eyes followed them as Junior took Nerzhin into headquarters.
Then he placed a log upright and swung at it with such bitter rage that he not
only split it into two blocks but drove the ax into the ground.
The ax was government property anyway.
* Alexander Nevsky: A thirteenth-century Russian prince greatly esteemed for
his military leadership and diplomatic wisdom that preserved Northeast
Russia from destruction by the Mongols. He was canonized by the Russian
Orthodox Church.