Chapter-10-The-Rosicrucians

NERZHIN MADE HIS WAYUP THE BROAD, red-carpeted stairway, deserted at
this hour, with bronze candlesticks and an ornate stucco ceiling overhead, to
the third floor. Trying to look carefree, he strolled past the desk of the “free
employee” manning the outside telephones and knocked at the door of the
director of research, MGB Engineer Colonel Anton Nikolaevich Yakonov.
The office was spacious, carpeted wall to wall, and furnished with
armchairs and sofas. The azure patch in the middle was the dazzling cloth on a
long conference table, contrasting with the brownness of Yakonov’s elegant
desk and armchair in the far corner. Nerzhin had viewed this magnificence
before, but not very often, and usually not alone but in group discussions.
Engineer Colonel Yakonov was over fifty but still in his prime. His stature,
the hint of powder on his face after shaving, his gold-rimmed pince-nez, his
soft, princely plumpness—an Obolensky or a Dolgoruky?
* —his majestic,
self-assured movements, made him a conspicuous figure among the grandees of
his ministry.
“Take a seat, Gleb Vikentich!” An expansive wave accompanied the
invitation. He sat hunched in his outsize armchair, twiddling a fat colored
pencil over the polished brown desktop.
Addressing him by his first name and patronymic was a mark of courtesy and
goodwill that cost the engineer colonel no effort, since he had a list of all the
prisoners, with their full names, under glass on his desk. (Those unaware of
this were amazed at Yakonov’s memory.) Nerzhin bowed silently. (He did not
hold his hands along the seams of his trousers but did not wave them about
either.) He sat down expectantly at the imposing, highly polished desk.
Yakonov’s voice was a rich rumble. It always seemed strange that this fine
gentleman did not cultivate an exquisite lisp.
“Do you know, Gleb Vikentich, I happened to think of you half an hour ago,
and I started wondering what wind exactly had blown you into the Acoustics
Lab, to—er—Roitman?”
Yakonov pronounced this name with undisguised contempt and, in the
presence of Roitman’s subordinate, didn’t even prefix it with the word
“Major.” Relations between the head of the Research Institute and his senior
deputy had deteriorated so far that there was no longer any point in concealing
it.
Nerzhin tensed. Instinct told him that the conversation was off to a bad start.
It was with the same contemptuous and ironical curve of his not-exactly-thin
and not-exactly-thick lips that Yakonov had told Nerzhin some days back that
he, Nerzhin, was perhaps objective about the results of the voice tests but that
he treated Number Seven not like a dear departed relative but like an
unidentified drunk found dead under the Marfino fence. Number Seven was
Yakonov’s hobbyhorse, but it was going very badly.
“. . . I, of course, greatly appreciate your personal contribution to the science
of voice classification . . . ” (he was being sarcastic!) “. . . and I’m dreadfully
sorry that your original monograph was printed only in a small, classified
edition, which denied you the fame of a sort of Russian George Fletcher . . . ”
(brutally sarcastic!) “. . . but I should still like to see a little more . . . profit, as
the Anglo-Saxons put it, from your activities. I pay homage to the abstract
sciences, but I am a practical man.”
Engineer Colonel Yakonov had risen high enough, yet was still at a sufficient
distance from the Leader of the Peoples, to permit himself the luxury of not
disguising his cleverness or refraining from idiosyncratic pronouncements.
“Well, now, let me ask you frankly, what is going on right now in the
Acoustics Lab?”
The most ruthless question imaginable! Yakonov simply didn’t have time to
keep up with everything, or he would have gotten their number long ago.
“Why the devil do you waste your time on that gibberish? ‘Styr . . . smyr . . .’
You’re a mathematician, aren’t you? A university man? Look behind you.”
Nerzhin looked and rose from his chair. There were three of them in the
office, not two! An unremarkable man in dark civilian clothes rose from a sofa
to face him. His round spectacles flashed as he moved his head. In the lavish
light from overhead, Nerzhin recognized Pyotr Trofimovich Verenyov, a senior
lecturer in his university before the war. But true to his prison training, he
remained silent and made no movement, assuming that the man before him was
a prisoner and fearing to compromise him by premature recognition. Verenyov
smiled but also looked embarrassed. Yakonov rumbled reassuringly.
“I must say, this ritual restraint is one of the things I envy about the
mathematical fraternity. All my life I’ve thought of mathematicians as a sort of
Rosicrucian brotherhood, and I’ve always regretted that it was never my luck
to be initiated into their mysteries. Don’t be shy. Shake hands and make
yourselves comfortable. I shall leave you for half an hour. You can exchange
fond memories, and Professor Verenyov can explain the tasks that the Sixth
Administration has set us.”
With this, Yakonov lifted himself out of his oversize chair and made light
work of carrying his far-from-light frame—made more imposing by his silverand-blue
epaulets—to the exit. When Nerzhin’s hand met Verenyov’s, they
were alone.
To Nerzhin, set as he was in his prison ways, this pale man in the twinkling
glasses was like a ghost unlawfully returning from a forgotten world, separated
from today’s world by the forests around Lake Ilmen, the hills and ravines of
the Orel region, the sands and marshes of Belorussia, prosperous Polish farms,
the tiled roofs of little German towns. Other memories were engraved on this
nine-year interval between meetings: the bright, bare boxes and cells of the
Lubyanka, the grime and stench of transit prisons, stifling compartments in
prisoner-transport trains, cold and hungry zeks out in the biting wind of the
steppes. It was impossible to think back beyond all this and relive how it felt
to see the formula for the functions of an independent variable written out on
the pliant oilcloth surface of a blackboard.
They lit cigarettes, Nerzhin unsteadily, and sat facing each other across a
small table.
It was not Verenyov’s first encounter with a former student—from Moscow
or from Rostov, where he had been sent before the war to draw a firm line
between conflicting schools of thought. But this meeting with Nerzhin was
something out of the ordinary for him, too: this establishment so near to and so
remote from Moscow, shrouded in a smokescreen of supersecrecy, wound
around with ring after ring of barbed wire, those unfamiliar blue overalls
instead of normal human dress. . . .
The younger of the two, with the lines around his mouth more pronounced
than ever, apparently had the right to ask the questions, while the older man
answered as though ashamed of his modest academic career: evacuation, return
from reevacuation, three years working with K–––, successful doctoral thesis
on topology. . . . Nerzhin, boorishly casual, did not even ask the subject of his
contribution to this austere field of study in which he had once himself intended
to choose his degree project. He suddenly felt sorry for Verenyov. . . . Ordered
magnitudes, incompletely ordered magnitudes, finite magnitudes. . . . Topology!
The stratosphere of human thought! In the twenty-fourth century it might just
possibly be of use to somebody, but for the present . . . For the present. . . .
Why should I speak of suns and worlds,
I have eyes for man’s suf ering alone.
But why had Verenyov left the university and landed in this department?
Posted here, of course. But couldn’t he have refused? Well, yes, he could, only.
. . . In this job his salary was doubled. . . . Did he have children? . . . Four of
them. . . .
For some reason, they started going over the students who had graduated
with Nerzhin. Their final examination had taken place on the day war broke
out. The most gifted of them had been killed or shell-shocked. They’re the ones
who always stick their necks out, never look after themselves. While those of
whom you would never have expected it were completing a higher-degree
course or held lectureships. Well, and what about the pride of the department,
Dmitri Dmitrich! Goryainov-Shakhovskoy! A little old man, so very old that he
had become slovenly in his habits, his black velvet jacket was always
smothered in chalk, and he often put the blackboard duster into his pocket
instead of his handkerchief. A walking anecdote, a compendium of innumerable
professorial jokes, the life and soul of the Imperial University of Warsaw,
which in 1915 had moved to the commercial town of Rostov as though to a
graveyard. On his golden jubilee as a scientist, he was honored with
congratulatory telegrams from Milwaukee, Cape Town, Yokohama. . . . Then in
1930, when the university was revamped as an “Industrial-Pedagogical
Institute,” he had been “purged” by a proletarian commission as a “hostile
bourgeois element.” Nothing could have saved him had he not known Kalinin
personally. It was said that Kalinin’s father had been one of the professor’s
father’s serfs. Whether that was so or not, Goryainov took a trip to Moscow
and brought back an order to “keep your hands off this man.”
And they did. They took such good care not to touch him that those not in the
know were sometimes quite alarmed. One minute he would be writing a
scientific paper with a mathematical proof of God’s existence. The next, in a
public lecture on his idol, Newton, the droning voice from under the yellowing
mustache would announce that somebody had sent up a note saying,
“According to Marx, Newton is a materialist, but you say that he is an idealist.
My answer is that Marx misrepresented the facts. Newton believed in God, as
all great scientists do.”
Recording his lectures was a nightmare! The stenographers were in despair!
Because his legs were weak, he would sit right by the blackboard, facing it,
with his back to his audience, writing with his right hand, erasing with his left,
and mumbling to himself incessantly. It was hopeless trying to understand his
ideas during a lecture. But Nerzhin and a fellow student, taking it in turns,
sometimes managed to write it all down and went over it in the evening. They
were awestruck, as though they were gazing into a sky filled with twinkling
stars.
So what had become of the old man? He had been concussed in an air raid on
Rostov and evacuated half-dead to Kirghizia. Then there was some story about
his sons, both lecturers—Verenyov didn’t know the details, some dirty
business, something treasonable. Stivka, the younger one, was now a
longshoreman on the New York waterfront, so they said.
Nerzhin studied Verenyov closely while he was talking. Strange that good
scientific minds, so agile in multidimensional space, should look at life itself
with tunnel vision. A thinker is insulted by thugs and louts—that is just a
symptom of immaturity, a momentary lapse; if his children remember their
father’s humiliation—that is obscene, that is treason. And who really knew
whether Stivka was actually a New York longshoreman or not? The secret
police shape public opinion.
What, Verenyov asked, had Nerzhin done to . . . find himself inside?
Nerzhin laughed.
No, really, what had he done?
“Thought the wrong thoughts, Pyotr Trofimovich. The Japanese have a law
that a man can be put on trial for his unspoken thoughts.”
“The Japanese! But we have no such law, do we?”
“Oh yes we do; it’s called 58 slash 10.”
After this, Nerzhin listened with one ear as Verenyov told him Yakonov’s
real reason for bringing them together. The Sixth Administration had sent
Verenyov to intensify and systematize the work they were doing on encoding.
Mathematicians were needed, lots of them, and Verenyov was delighted to see
among them a former student for whom he had had high hopes.
Nerzhin mechanically asked for details, and Pyotr Trofimovich, in a fine
mathematical frenzy, set about explaining the object of the research and
detailing the experiments to be made and the formulas to be reconsidered.
Nerzhin’s mind, meanwhile, was on those scraps of paper which he covered
with his tiny handwriting, secure and at peace behind his camouflaged
defenses, while Simochka stole loving glances at him, and Lev good-naturedly
bumbled.
Those tiny pages were the first fruits of his maturity. It was preferable, of
course, to reach maturity before your thirties—and in your original subject.
Why, it might be asked, should he stick his head into those jaws from which
historians themselves had scuttled away to ages safely over and done with?
Why was he so fascinated by the riddle of the grim inflated giant who had only
to flutter an eyelash and Nerzhin’s head would fly off?
Should he, then, surrender to the tentacles of the cryptographic octopus? For
fourteen hours a day they would crush him, never relaxing even during rest
periods. Probability theory, number theory, the theory of error, would
monopolize his thoughts. It would be brain death. Desiccation of the soul. What
room would there be for meditation? For trying to make sense of life?
Still, this was a sharashka. Not a camp. There was meat for dinner. Butter in
the morning. The skin on your hands was not lacerated and callused. Your
fingers weren’t frostbitten. You didn’t slump onto the bed-planks like an
insensate log in your filthy rope sandals—no, you got into bed happily, under a
clean white comforter.
So what was the point of just living all your life? Living for the sake of
living? With no concern beyond your physical comfort?
Lovely comfort! But what is the point if there is nothing more?
Reason told him to agree.
His heart said, Get thee behind me, Satan!
“Pyotr Trofimovich, do you know how to make shoes?”
“What was that?”
“I mean, can you teach me to make shoes? I want to learn to make shoes.”
“I’m sorry, I don’t understand. . . .”
“Pyotr Trofimovich! You live in a shell! When I’ve served my sentence, I
will be going into the depths of the taiga into permanent exile. I can’t do any
sort of work with my hands, so how am I going to live? There are brown bears
out there. Another three Mesozoic eras will come and go before anybody out
there needs Leonard Euler’s functions.”
“What are you talking about, Nerzhin? If your work as a cryptographer is
successful, you will be released early; your conviction will be annulled; you’ll
be given an apartment in Moscow.”
“My dear Pyotr Trofimovich, I don’t want any thanks from them, I don’t want
their forgiveness, and I’m not interested in catching minnows for them. . . .”
The door opened, and in came the great panjandrum with the gold-rimmed
pince-nez on his fleshy nose.
“How goes it, my Rosicrucian friends? All settled?”
Still seated, Nerzhin looked Yakonov straight in the eye and replied:
“With respect, Anton Nikolaevich, I consider that my work in the Acoustics
Laboratory is not yet complete.”
By now Yakonov was standing behind his desk, the knuckles of his pudgy
hands resting on its glass top to take his weight. Only those who knew him well
would have realized from his words that he was angry.
“Mathematics! And articulation. You’ve traded the food of the gods for a
mess of pottage. You can go.”
And with the two-colored lead of his fat pencil, he made a note on his memo
pad: “Write off Nerzhin.”
* Obolensky or Dolgoruky: Noble families of long-standing eminence.