Chapter-48-The-Double-Agent

NOTCOUNTING ROLY-POLYGUSTAV with the pink ears, Doronin was the
youngest zek in the sharashka. His good nature, his readiness to oblige, and his
liveliness won all hearts. During the few minutes in which volleyball was
allowed, Rostislav gave himself heart and soul to the game. If those nearest the
net let a ball pass, he would dive forward from the baseline, dig out the ball,
and fall to the ground, grazing knees and elbows till they bled. People liked his
unusual first name, too, “Ruska”; it fully justified itself two months after his
arrival, when his head, shaved in the camp, had grown a mop of red hair.
He had been brought from Vorkuta because the Gulag had him down in its
card index as a milling-machine operator. The phony machinist was quickly
replaced with a real one, but Ruska was spared the return journey to Vorkuta
when Dvoetyosov undertook to teach him to operate the smallest of the vacuum
pumps. Ruska soon got the hang of it. He clung to the sharashka as though it
were a rest home; he had suffered all sorts of hardships in the camps and
talked about them now with gleeful abandon. How he was nearly a “goner”
working in a wet pit, how he had learned to skip work by pretending every day
to have a high temperature, warming both armpits with heated stones of equal
size so that there would never be more than a tenth of a degree difference (they
tried to catch him by using two thermometers).
But though he laughingly recalled his past, which would certainly repeat
itself sometime in the future since he was in for twenty-five years, Ruska
revealed himself to very few, and only under oath of secrecy, in his major role,
that of an absconder who had led the MGB sleuths by the nose for two years. A
worthy godchild of that organization, he was no more desperate for publicity
than it was.
He did not stand out from the rest of the motley crowd in the sharashka until
that September day. The day on which Ruska approached in turn, with a
mysterious look on his face, the twenty-five most influential prisoners, those
who shaped public opinion in the sharashka, and excitedly told each of them
tête-à-tête that Major Shikin had that morning sought to recruit him as an
informer and that he, Ruska, had consented, with the intention of using his new
position for the common good.
Rostislav Doronin’s colorful dossier was adorned with five changes of
name, and all sorts of black marks and cryptic symbols showing how
dangerous he was, his predisposition to escape, and the need to keep him
handcuffed in transit, but Major Shikin, eager to reinforce his team of
informers, calculated that, being young, he was pliable, that he valued his
place in the sharashka, and that he would therefore be loyal to his operations
officer.
Secretly summoned to Shikin’s office (you would be summoned perhaps to
the secretariat and told, “Oh yes, just look in on Major Shikin”), Rostislav
spent three hours with him. In that time, as he listened to the godfather’s boring
instructions and explanations, his sharp eyes had studied not only the major’s
large head, which had gone gray over his files of denunciations and spiteful
tittle-tattle, his dark face, his tiny hands, his feet in boys’shoes, his marble
desk set and his silk blinds; he had also read the headings on files and the
pieces of paper under the glass desktop, mentally inverting the letters, although
he was sitting a meter and a half from the edge of the desk, and had still found
time to work out which documents Shikin seemed to keep in the safe and which
he locked in his desk.
From time to time, Doronin’s ingenuous blue eyes gazed into the major’s, and
he nodded in agreement. This blue-eyed naïveté concealed a seething mass of
wild ideas, but the operations officer, who was accustomed to the gray
uniformity of meek compliance, could not know that.
Ruska knew very well that Shikin could send him back to Vorkuta if he
refused to become a stoolie.
Not only Ruska but Ruska’s whole generation had been trained to think of
“pity” as a degrading sentiment, of “kindness” as comic, and of “conscience”
as priest’s talk. On the other hand, it had been drilled into them that informing
was at once a patriotic duty, the best way to help the subject of your
denunciation, and good for the health of society. Ruska did not take all of this
in, but it had a certain influence on him. The main question for him now was
not whether becoming a stoolie was a bad thing or permissible but where it
would get him. Young as he was, he was rich in experience; he had lived a
turbulent life, met many interesting people in prison, listened to any number of
fierce prison disputes, and never lost sight of the possibility that all these
MGB archives might be exhumed someday and the secret collaborators face
disgrace and prosecution.
So that agreeing to cooperate with the godfather was as dangerous in the long
term as was refusal in the short term.
But quite apart from all these calculations, Ruska was a virtuoso adventurist.
As he read the intriguing bits of paper upside down under Shikin’s glass
desktop, he shivered in pleasurable anticipation of an exciting game. He had
wearied of inactivity in the claustrophobic comfort of the sharashka!
Inquiring exactly how much he would be paid, in order to make it look
convincing, Ruska enthusiastically agreed.
When he had left, Shikin, well satisfied with his psychological acuteness,
walked about his office rubbing tiny palm against tiny palm. Such an
enthusiastic informant gave promise of a rich harvest of denunciations.
Meanwhile, a no-less-complacent Ruska made the rounds of those zeks in
whom he had confidence, confessing that he had agreed to become an informer
for the sake of the sport, because he wanted to study MGB methods, and also to
expose the real stoolies.
Even the older zeks could remember no similar confession. They asked
Ruska doubtfully why he was risking his head by boasting. His answer was,
“When there’s a Nuremberg trial for this dog pack, you will give evidence in
my defense.”
Each of the twenty zeks who heard his news told one or two others, yet no
one went and reported it to the godfather! This in itself put some fifty people
safely beyond suspicion.
Ruska’s adventure caused a stir in the sharashka. People trusted the boy. And
went on trusting him. But, as always, the course of events had a logic of its
own. Shikin demanded “material.” Ruska would have to give him something.
He made the rounds of his confidants and complained to them. “Gentlemen!
You can imagine how much telling all the others are doing! I’ve only had the
job a month, and Shikin is really putting the pressure on! Look at it from my
point of view, and slip me a scrap of material!”
Some of them didn’t want to know about it, but others slipped him something
occasionally. It was unanimously decided to ruin a certain female who only
worked out of greed, boosting the thousands her husband took home. She
treated the zeks with contempt, frequently voiced her opinion that they should
all be shot (she only talked like this among the female free employees, but the
zeks soon got to know about it), and she herself had thrown two of them to the
wolves, one for an affair with a female employee, the other for making a
suitcase from material belonging to the state. Ruska told a pack of shameless
lies about her; she posted letters for zeks, stole condensers from the store
cabinet. . . . Although he could not offer Shikin a shred of proof and although
the lady’s husband, an MVD colonel, protested emphatically, nothing could
prevail against such a secret denunciation. The lady was dismissed and left in
tears.
Sometimes Ruska informed on prisoners, too, reporting innocuous trifles and
with due warning. But then the warnings stopped. He kept his intentions to
himself. No one questioned him, but they could not help knowing that he was
still bearing tales of a sort he could not own up to.
So Ruska was overtaken by the fate of all double-dealers. As before, no one
gave his game away, but everyone began to steer clear of him. The scraps of
information he passed on about the timetable under Shikin’s glass desktop,
showing when each of his informers could pop into his office unsummoned and
thus showing when they could be caught in the act, did not altogether
compensate for his own membership in the stoolie fraternity.
Nerzhin was fond of Ruska in spite of his intrigues and did not suspect him of
telling Shikin about the Yesenin volume. Losing the book had hurt Gleb in a
way that Ruska could not foresee. He had assumed that it was Gleb’s property
and that, once this was made clear, it would not be taken from him. In the
meantime, Shikin could be kept happy with a report that Nerzhin had a book
hidden in his case, no doubt brought in by one of the girls.
WITH THE FRAGRANCE of Klara’s kiss still on his lips, Ruska went out into the
yard. The lime trees, white with snow, seemed to him to be in bloom, and the
air seemed warm and spring-like. In his two-year game of hide-and-seek, he
had been so preoccupied with boyish schemes to fool the sleuths that he had
given no thought to the love of women. He had gone to prison a virgin, and
now his evenings were a torment for which he found no solace.
Now, as he went out into the yard and saw the long, low headquarters
building, he remembered that he meant to put on a show there at dinnertime
next day. The time had come to advertise it. (To do so earlier might have
ruined everything.) Still under Klara’s spell and feeling three times as clever
and sure of himself because of it, he looked around, spotted Rubin and Nerzhin
at the far side of the exercise ground, and made straight for them. His cap was
pushed back to one side, so that his whole brow, part of his crown, and a lock
of hair were trustingly exposed to the not very cold air.
As Ruska approached, he could tell from Nerzhin’s stern look and the frown
that Rubin turned on him that he had interrupted a serious conversation.
Obviously for his benefit, they switched to something unimportant.
Still, he swallowed his resentment and said his piece. “You are, I hope,
familiar with the general rule in just societies that all labor must be
remunerated? Well, tomorrow is the day when each of the Judases will receive
his thirty pieces of silver for the third quarter of this year.”
Nerzhin feigned indignation. “You mean to say those tightfisted so-and-sos
are just paying them for the third quarter? They’ve worked four quarters,
surely.”
“The payroll needs a lot of signatures,” Ruska explained apologetically. “I
will be one of those collecting.”
“You mean you get paid for the third quarter, too? You’ve only been on the
job half a quarter.”
“Ah, but I’ve distinguished myself!” Ruska treated them both to a disarming
smile.
“Do you get paid in cash?”
“God forbid! You get a phony money order, and its face value is credited to
you. They asked what name I wanted them to use for the sender? How about
Ivan Ivanovich Ivanov? I was flabbergasted. How corny can you get? Can’t
you make it out as from Klava Kudryavtseva? I said. It’s nice to think that some
woman cares about you.”
“So how much do you get a quarter?”
“That’s the really clever bit. Officially an informer is allowed 150 rubles a
month. But to make it look respectable, it’s sent by mail, and the heartless post
office takes three rubles in postal charges. The godfathers are too miserly to
make it up from their own pockets and too lazy to suggest a three-ruble raise
for stoolies. So the money orders will all be for 147 rubles. Since no normal
person ever sends a money order for such a sum, those missing thirty tenkopeck
pieces are the mark of Judas. At dinnertime tomorrow you must crowd
around headquarters and examine the money orders of those who’ve been to
see the operations officer. The motherland should know who its stoolies are,
don’t you think, gentlemen?”