Chapter-34-Voiceprints

NOBODYWANTED TO WORK ON SUNDAY, free staff included. They drifted in
listlessly, avoiding the normal weekday crush on the buses, and tried to arrange
things so that they could get through to 6:00 p.m. undisturbed.
But that Sunday proved more hectic than any weekday. At about 10:00 a.m.
three very long, very streamlined cars drove up to the main gates. The watch
saluted. The cars drove through the gates, passed Spiridon, the redheaded
yardman, who stood broom in hand peering at them, then rolled over snow-free
gravel paths to the main entrance of the institute. High-ranking officers issued
from all three cars, epaulets flashing, and without waiting for anyone to meet
them, went right upstairs to Yakonov’s office on the third floor. No one
managed to get a good look at them. The rumor went around some of the
laboratories that Minister Abakumov had arrived in person, accompanied by
eight generals. In other laboratories people went on sitting quietly, unaware of
the impending storm.
The rumor was half true: Deputy Minister Selivanovsky had arrived,
accompanied by four generals.
But something unprecedented had happened: Engineer Colonel Yakonov was
not yet at work. The frightened duty officer (swiftly pushing in the drawer in
which he had been furtively reading a detective story) phoned Yakonov at
home, then reported to the deputy minister that Colonel Yakonov had been in
bed with a heart attack but was getting dressed and coming in. Meanwhile,
Yakonov’s deputy, Major Roitman, a lean man with a tailored tunic, struggling
to straighten the sword belt that sat so awkwardly on him and stumbling over
the strip of carpet (he was very nearsighted), hurried in from the Acoustics
Laboratory and presented himself to his superiors. He had been in such a hurry
not only because regulations demanded it but also to defend the interests of the
opposition party in the institute, which he led; Yakonov always tried to squeeze
him out of conversations with higher authority. Roitman already knew the full
story of Pryanchikov’s nocturnal outing and was eager to convince the high
commission that the situation with the scrambler was not so hopeless as that,
for instance, with the speech clipper. Although only thirty, Roitman had already
won a Stalin Prize, and he fearlessly exposed his laboratory to visitations from
on high.
He had perhaps ten listeners, of whom two more or less understood the
technicalities. The others simply preserved a dignified silence. Oskolupov,
however, had sent for Mamurin, who appeared shortly after Roitman, livid and
stammering with rage in standing up for the clipper, which was, he said, nearly
ready to be put into production. Shortly afterward Yakonov also turned up,
with bags under his sunken eyes and a bluish tinge in his bloodless face, and
sank onto a chair by the wall. The conversation became fragmentary and
confused, and before long nobody had any idea how to salvage the doomed
enterprise.
As bad luck would have it, the heart of the institute and the conscience of the
institute, Operations Officer Comrade Shikin and Party Organizer Comrade
Stepanov, had given way that Sunday morning to a perfectly natural temptation
to stay away from work and leave the collective that they managed on
weekdays to look after itself. (Behavior all the more pardonable because, as
everybody knows, if the proper Party educational and organizational measures
have been implemented, participation of managerial personnel in the work
process is by no means essential.) Alarm and an acute awareness of his
unexpected responsibility gripped the duty officer. At some risk to himself, he
abandoned the telephones and hurried around the laboratories, informing their
heads in a whisper that extraordinarily important guests had arrived, in order
to make them redouble their vigilance. He was so flustered and in such a hurry
to get back to his telephones that he ignored the locked door of the design
office and had no time to look in at the Vacuum Laboratory, where Klara
Makarygina was on duty and none of the other free workers had appeared.
The heads of laboratories in turn made no public announcements (you
couldn’t openly ask people to pretend to be working because the brass had
arrived) but went around the workplaces warning everybody individually in an
embarrassed whisper.
The whole institute, then, was at a standstill, waiting for the bosses. After a
hurried conference some of the visitors remained in Yakonov’s office, and
others made for Number Seven, while only Selivanovsky accompanied Major
Roitman down to the Acoustics Laboratory. To dodge this new chore, Yakonov
had recommended “Acoustics” as a convenient base for the execution of
Ryumin’s commission.
“But how do you expect to identify the man?” Selivanovsky asked as they
went along. Roitman had first heard of the commission five minutes ago and so
had no thoughts on the matter. Oskolupov had done the thinking for him the
night before, when he thoughtlessly undertook the task. All the same, Roitman’s
mind had been busy in the last five minutes.
He addressed the deputy minister informally and with no trace of servility.
“Look,” he said. “We have a visible speech device for recording speech
visually. It prints off what we call voiceprints, and there’s a man by the name
of Rubin who can read them.”
“A prisoner?”
“Yes. Senior lecturer in philology. Just lately I’ve had him working on the
detection of individual speech peculiarities. And I hope that by voiceprinting
this telephone message and comparing the results with the voiceprints of the
suspects. . . .”
Selivanovsky looked doubtful.
“Hmm. . . . We will have to get Abakumov’s approval for this philologist.”
“You mean security clearance?”
“Yes.”
Meanwhile, although they all knew in the Acoustics Laboratory that the brass
had arrived, they simply could not overcome the numbing inertia of idleness.
They made a show of activity, rummaging in drawers containing valves,
scanning diagrams in magazines, gaping at the view from the window. Among
the free employees the younger women huddled together gossiping in whispers,
and Roitman’s assistant tried to break it up. Simochka, luckily for her, was not
at work; she was making up for the extra day she had put in and so was spared
the torment of seeing Nerzhin all dressed up and radiant in anticipation of his
meeting with the woman who had first claim on him.
Nerzhin felt as though it was his birthday. He looked in at the Acoustics
Laboratory for the third time, not because he had any business there but
because waiting for the long-overdue police truck made him restless and
nervous. He did not sit on his own chair but on the window ledge, inhaling the
smoke of a cigarette with enjoyment and listening to Rubin. Having failed to
find in Professor Chelnov an appreciative audience for the ballad on Moses,
Rubin was now reading it with quiet fervor to Nerzhin. Rubin was no poet, but
the lines he dashed off were sometimes clever and full of feeling. Not long
ago, Gleb had praised highly the breadth of vision he had shown in a study in
verse of Alyosha Karamazov, who appeared simultaneously in the overcoat of
a White officer defending Perekop and in the overcoat of a Red Army man
storming Perekop. Now Rubin very much wanted Gleb to appreciate the Moses
ballad and take to heart the message that waiting and believing for forty years
is rational, necessary, and essential.
Rubin could not exist without friends; he suffocated without them. He found
solitude so unbearable that he did not even allow his thoughts to ripen in his
own head; as soon as he had so much as half a thought, he hastened to share it.
He had been rich in friends all his life, but in prison it so happened that his
friends did not share his views and those who did were not his friends.
No one in the Acoustics Laboratory was working, then, as yet, except for the
ever blithe and busy Pryanchikov, who had gotten over the memory of Moscow
by night and his crazy journey and was meditating a further improvement to his
model, crooning,
Bendzi-bendzi-bendzi-ba-ar
Bendzi-bendzi-bendzi-bar.
At this point Selivanovsky and Roitman entered. Roitman went on with what
he was saying: “In these voiceprints speech is visualized in three sets of
measurements simultaneously; frequency is registered transversely across the
tape, duration lengthwise along the tape, and volume by the depth of the
impression. By this means every sound stands out as something so unique and
original that it is easily identified, and you can even read back whatever has
been said from the tape. Here we have”—he led Selivanovsky to the far end of
the laboratory—“the VIR device, designed in our laboratory” (Roitman had
forgotten himself that they had lifted it from an American journal), “and here”
(cautiously steering the deputy minister in the direction of the window) “is
Candidate in Philological Sciences Rubin, the only man in the Soviet Union
who can read visually recorded speech.” (Rubin rose and bowed silently.)
As soon as Roitman had pronounced the word “voiceprint” at the doorway,
Rubin and Nerzhin had pricked up their ears. Their work, treated as a joke by
most people, was emerging at last into the light of day. It took Roitman forty-
five seconds to lead Selivanovsky to them, but with the zeks’ unique quickwittedness,
they had realized at once that Rubin would have to demonstrate his
skill in reading from voiceprints. One of the regular speakers must read the text
into the microphone, and Nerzhin was the only one present in the room. They
also realized that, although Rubin really could read voiceprints, he might slip
up in an examination, and this must not be allowed to happen; it could mean a
backward somersault into the netherworld of the camps.
They understood each other at a glance.
“If you do it, and you can choose the sentence,” Rubin whispered, “say,
‘Voiceprints enable the deaf to use the telephone.’ ”
Nerzhin whispered in reply, “If he gives me a sentence, you’ll have to
decipher it from the tape. If I smooth my hair, you’re getting it right; if I
straighten my tie, you’re wrong.”
That was where Rubin rose and silently bowed.
Roitman went on in that hesitant, self-deprecating voice of his, which you
would have known without looking at him must belong to an intellectual:
“Right, now Lev Grigorievich will demonstrate his skill. One of the
speakers, say, Gleb Vikentich, will go into the soundproof box and read a
sentence into the microphone, the machine will record it, and Lev Grigorievich
will try to decipher it.”
Standing one step away from the deputy minister, Nerzhin fixed him with an
insolent Gulag stare.
“You want to think of a sentence?” he asked curtly.
“No, no,” Selivanovsky answered politely, avoiding his eyes. “Make
something up yourself.”
Nerzhin obediently took a piece of paper, thought a moment, had an
inspiration, and in the sudden hush handed what he had written to Selivanovsky
in such a way that not even Roitman could read it.
“Voiceprints enable the deaf to use the telephone.”
“Is that really so?” Selivanovsky asked in surprise.
“Yes.”
“Go ahead and read.”
The apparatus began humming. Nerzhin went into the soundproof booth (how
disgraceful the sackcloth curtain looked at that moment! . . . that everlasting
shortage of materials in the stores!) and shut himself off from the eyes and ears
of the world. The apparatus chattered, and two meters of damp tape, marked
with inky streaks and smudges, were deposited on Rubin’s desk.
The whole lab stopped pretending to work and watched in suspense.
Roitman was obviously nervous. Nerzhin left the booth and watched Rubin
impassively from a distance. Everybody else was standing; Rubin alone
remained seated, giving them glimpses of his bald spot. Taking pity on his
impatient audience, he made no attempt to hide his hieratic ritual but quickly
marked off sections of the still-damp tape with the usual blunt copying pencil.
“You see, certain sounds can be deciphered without the least difficulty, the
accented or sonorous vowels, for example. In the second word the r sound is
distinctly visible twice. In the first word the accented sound of ee and in front
of it a soft v—for there can’t be a hard sound there. Before that is the formant
a, but we mustn‘t forget that in the first, the secondary accented syllable o is
also pronounced like a. But the vowel oo or u retains its individuality even
when it’s far from the accent—right here it has the characteristic lowfrequency
streak. The third sound of the first word is unquestionably u. And
after it follows a palatal explosive consonant, most likely k—and so we have
ukov’ or ukavi. And here is a hard v—it is clearly distinguished from the soft
v, for it has no streak higher than 2,300 cycles. Vukovi—and then there is a
resounding hard stop and at the very end an attenuated vowel, and these
together I can interpret as dy. So we get vukovidy—and we have to guess at the
first sound, which is smeared. I could take it for an s if it weren’t that the sense
tells me it’s a z. And so the first word is”— and Rubin pronounced the word
for “voiceprints”—“zvukovidy.” He continued: “Now, in the second word, as I
said, there are two r sounds and, apparently, the regular verb ayet, but since it
is in the plural it is evidently ayut. Evidently razryvayut or razreshayut, and
I’ll find out which in a moment. Antonina Valeryanovna, was it you who took
the magnifying glass? Could I please have it a moment?”
The magnifying glass was quite unnecessary, as the apparatus made bold,
broad marks. It was an old con’s spoof, and Nerzhin laughed quietly to himself,
absently smoothing his already smoothed hair. Rubin gave him a fleeting glance
and took the proffered magnifying glass. The general tension was growing, all
the more so because nobody knew whether Rubin was guessing correctly so
far. Selivanovsky was profoundly impressed.
“Amazing,” he whispered. “Simply amazing.”
Nobody noticed Lieutenant Shusterman tiptoeing into the room. He had no
right to be there, so he kept his distance. He signaled to Nerzhin to hurry up,
but instead of leaving the room with him stayed behind, waiting for a chance to
summon Rubin. He wanted to send Rubin to make his bed again, this time
properly. It was not the first time that he had bullied Rubin with such
readjustments.
Meanwhile, Rubin had deciphered the word “deaf” and moved on. Roitman
was radiant. Not merely because he had a share in Rubin’s triumph but because
he sincerely rejoiced in any practical success.
At that point Rubin happened to raise his eyes, encountered Shusterman’s
malignant scowl, realized why he was there, and bestowed on him a look of
malicious glee, as if to say, “Straighten it yourself!”
“The final word, ‘telephone,’ we come across so frequently that I’m used to
it and can recognize it immediately. And that’s the whole thing.”
“Astonishing!” Selivanovsky said yet again. “May I ask your name and
patronymic?”
“Lev Grigorievich.”
“Well, then, Lev Grigorievich, can you identify individual vocal peculiarities
from voiceprints?”
“We call it ‘individual speech type.’ As a matter of fact, that is precisely
what we’re working on at present.”
“That’s very lucky! I think we can find a job that may interest you.”
Shusterman left on tiptoe.