Chapter-69-Behind-a-Closed-Visor

THE OFFICER WHO CAME ON DUTYLATE that Sunday evening was a trim young
lieutenant with two token squares of mustache under his nostrils. After lights
out, he paraded in person along the upper and lower hallways of the special
prison, chasing the prisoners, always reluctant to turn in on Sundays, to bed.
He would have made a second sally if he could have torn himself away from
the buxom little nurse in the sickbay. She had a husband in Moscow, but he
could not reach her in the restricted area during the twenty-four hours she
would be on duty. The lieutenant had high hopes that this was his night to get
somewhere with her, though so far she had eluded his grasp, laughingly telling
him over and over again to “stop playing the fool.”
So instead of chasing the prisoners a second time, he sent his aide, the
sergeant major. Knowing that the lieutenant would not check up on him, indeed
would not set foot outside the sickbay before morning, the sergeant major made
no great effort to put them all to bed. For one thing, after many years of service
he had finally tired of being a police dog, and for another, he knew that grown
men who had to go to work the next day would not forget that they needed
sleep.
Extinguishing the lights in the hallways and on the stairs of the special prison
was not allowed because it might help escapers or rioters.
So Rubin and Sologdin had twice avoided dismissal and still stood hugging
the wall in the main hallway. It was after midnight, but they had no thought of
sleep.
It was one of those furious, unresolvable arguments with which Russians,
unless they come to blows instead, like to conclude a convivial evening.
But it was also the sort of ferocious argument that can take place only in jail;
outside, a single view, that of the regime, reigns unchallenged.
The duel on paper had proved a failure. In the past hour or so, Rubin and
Sologdin had taken the other two laws of the hapless dialectic apart, but the
arguments they bounced off each other, finding no snag, no salutary ledge to
slow their descent, rolled rapidly into the mouth of the volcano.
“If there are no contradictions, then there is no unity either?”
“So?”
“What do you mean, So? You’re afraid of your own shadow! Am I right or
am I wrong?”
“Right, of course.”
Sologdin beamed. Fired by this glimpse of a weak spot in Rubin’s defenses,
he crouched, sharp-featured, ready to pounce.
“Well, then, whatever is free of contradictions doesn’t exist? So why did you
promise a classless society?”
“ ‘Class’ is a foreign word.”
“Don’t try to wriggle out of it. You know that a society free of contradictions
is an impossibility, yet you shamelessly promised it. You. . . .”
In 1917 they had both been five-year-olds, but each of them, in his argument
with the other, was ready to answer for the whole history of mankind.
“You crucified yourselves to do away with oppression, but you inflicted
worse, far worse, oppressors on us. Was it worth killing so many millions of
people for that?”
“You’re too jaundiced to see clearly,” Rubin shouted, forgetting the need to
lower his voice for fear of compromising the opponent who was so eager to
throttle him. (His own arguments, however loud, could not damage him, since
he was on the side of the regime.)
“When you enter the classless society, your hatred will still prevent you from
recognizing it.”
“But right now—is it classless now? Give me a straight answer just this
once! Just for once, don’t dodge the question. Is there or is there not a new
class, a ruling class?”
How difficult Rubin found it to answer that very question! He could see for
himself that there was such a class. And that if it entrenched itself, it would
deprive the Revolution of all sense and meaning.
But no shadow of weakness, no hint of uncertainty, troubled the lofty brow of
this true believer.
“Do you mean it’s detached from the rest of society?” he asked loudly. “Can
you really distinguish precisely between the rulers and the ruled?”
Sologdin’s voice rang out boldly in reply: “I can indeed! Foma, Anton, and
Shishkin-Myshkin are the rulers, and we—”
“No, but are there really any fixed lines of demarcation? Class divisions
resulting from inheritance of property? No, everything has to be earned by
service. Prince today, in the gutter tomorrow. Isn’t that the way of it?”
“If it is, so much the worse! If every member of society can be brought down,
there’s only one way he can make sure of survival—by doing whatever he’s
ordered to do. A gentleman in the old days could be as impertinent as he liked;
the powers that be couldn’t take his noble birth away from him.”
“You and your precious little gentlemen! People like Siromakha!”
(Siromakha was the sharashka’s number-one stool pigeon.)
“Or take the merchant class. The market forced them to use their heads and
react to changed circumstances quickly. Not like those friends of yours! Just
think what a hopeless bunch they are—no concept of honor, no breeding, no
education, no imagination, they hate freedom. The only way they can hang on to
their positions is by debasing themselves.”
“It doesn’t take much intelligence to realize that this is a transitional
bureaucratic group, and that as the state withers away—”
“Wither away?” Sologdin yelled. “Those people? Voluntarily? They won’t
go away till they’re slung out by the scruffs of their necks! Your state wasn’t
created because of the ‘moneybags’—meaning ‘capitalist’—encirclement. It
was created to cement by cruelty an unnatural way of life! If you people were
alone on this earth, you’d go on forever making your state stronger and
stronger!”
With so many years of repression and forced silence behind him, it was an
immense relief to fling his views in the face of a companion who would listen
and who was at the same time a confirmed Bolshevik and so of course
responsible for all that had happened.
For his part, Rubin had outraged all those he had encountered from his first
days in the counterespionage unit’s cell at the front and through a long
succession of cells elsewhere by proudly proclaiming that he was a Marxist
and had no intention of renouncing his views, even in prison. He had grown
used to being a sheepdog in a pack of wolves, defending himself singlehandedly
against forty or fifty at a time. His lips were raw and cracked from
futile arguments, but it was his duty, his absolute duty, to explain to the blind
their blindness, to wrestle with enemies among his cellmates in order to save
them, since most of them were not really enemies but ordinary Soviet people,
victims of Progress and the imperfections of the penal system. Personal
grievances had clouded their consciousness, but if war with America should
break out tomorrow, and these people were given weapons, they would almost
to a man forget how their lives had been shattered, forgive their tormentors,
think no more of the grief their sundered families had suffered, and rush to
sacrifice themselves in defense of socialism, as Rubin himself would.
At the critical moment, Sologdin would obviously do the same; it could not
be otherwise! Only dogs and traitors would behave differently!
Their argument bounded over sharp, lacerating stones until it reached this
very point.
“Where, I ask you, is the difference? According to you, a former zek who’s
done ten years for squat and turns his weapons against his jailers is a traitor to
his country! Whereas the German whom you have processed and sent back to
his own lines to break his oath of loyalty and betray his fatherland you call a
‘progressive’!”
“How can you compare the two?” Rubin sounded astonished. “Objectively,
my German is for socialism, and your zek is against it. Can you really say
there’s any comparison?”
If the hot fury expressed in them could melt the substance eyes are made of,
Sologdin’s eyes would have gushed out in blue streams.
“It’s no good talking to you! For thirty years you’ve lived by this device”—in
the heat of the moment, he let slip the foreign word, but it was a good one, from
the age of chivalry—“ ‘the end justifies the means.’ But if you were asked
point-blank whether that’s what you believe, I’m sure you’d deny it! Oh yes
you would!”
“What makes you think so?” Rubin asked, cool and conciliatory. “In my
personal affairs I don’t acknowledge it, but if we’re talking about society as a
whole, that’s another matter. For the first time in human history, our aim is so
lofty that we can say just that: The end justifies the means employed for its
attainment.”
“So you’re prepared to go that far!” Sologdin’s rapier sang as he lunged at a
vulnerable spot. “Just remember this, then—that the loftier your aim, the nobler
must be your means. Treacherous means destroy the end itself!”
“What do you call treacherous means? Are you perhaps denying the
legitimacy of Revolutionary means?”
“When did you ever have a Revolution? Mayhem isn’t Revolution; axes
dripping blood aren’t Revolution! Who could even begin counting those
massacred or executed? The world would be horror-struck!
Like an express train rushing through the night, stopping nowhere, past rural
stops, past wayside signal lights, across empty steppes, and through brightly lit
towns, their argument sped over light and dark places in their memories, and
everything that briefly loomed threw an uncertain light on, elicited a muffled
echo from, their uncontrollably swaying, coupled thoughts.
“To pass judgment on a country, you must first know at least a little about it,”
Rubin said angrily. “You’ve been moldering in camps for twelve years. And
how much did you see before that? The Patriarch’s Ponds? Did you go on
Sunday outings to Kolomenskoye?”
“What gives you the right to judge?” Sologdin kept his voice down to a
muffled cry, as though he were being strangled. “Shame on you! You should be
ashamed! Remember all those who went through Butyrki Prison when you
were there—Gromov, Ivantyev, Yashin, Blokhin—they told you the sober truth,
told you their life stories; don’t tell me you weren’t listening. And what about
this place? What about Vartapyetov? Or that other man, what’s his name,
now. . . ?”
“Who? Who? Why should I listen to them? Blind men, all of them! All they
do is howl like beasts with their paws caught in a trap. As they see it, their
own failure in life means that socialism is a flop. Their observatory is the slop
bucket; the aromas of the slop bucket are the breath of life to them.”
“Is there anybody, then, anybody at all you’re capable of listening to? If so,
who?”
“The young! The young are on our side! And they are the future!”
“The young? You’re imagining things! They couldn’t care less about your
shining lights!” (meaning “ideals”).
“What gives you the right to speak for the young? I fought in the front line
with them, went on reconnaissance with them, and all you know is what you’ve
heard from some wretched émigré in a transit prison. How can you say the
young have no ideology when there are ten million Komsomols in the
country?”
“Komsomols! Kom-somols! Are you a halfwit or something? What you call
the League of Communist Youth is just a device for the conversion of wrapping
paper into membership books.”
“Watch your mouth! I was a member myself. The Komsomol was our banner!
Our conscience! Our selfless, romantic dream! The Komsomol movement was
all that to us!”
“Gone, and best forgotten!”
“Anyway, who’s talking? After all, you were a Komsomol yourself in those
days.”
“Yes, and I’ve paid in full for it! Been punished for it! You make a deal with
Mephistopheles . . . Margarita! Her honor lost! Her brother dead! Her child
dead! Madness! Perdition—”
“Never mind Margarita! It can’t be true that your Komsomol days have left
nothing in your soul.”
“Soul, did you say? How your language has changed in the last twenty years!
Nowadays you talk about ‘the soul’ and ‘conscience’ and ‘sacrilege.’ . . . I
would have loved to hear you utter such words in your pious Communist days
in 1927! . . . You corrupted a whole generation of young Russians. . . .”
“Looking at you, you could be right.”
“And then you set to work on the Germans, the Poles. . . .”
On and on they charged, incapable now of matching argument and response,
their thoughts no longer following each other in logical sequence, with no eyes
for, no awareness of, the hallway, in which the only others left were two
fanatical chess players and the old blacksmith with his hacking smoker’s
cough, and where their agitated arm-waving, their inflamed faces, and their
aggressively poised beards, one black and bristly, one neat and fair, were so
conspicuous.
“Gleb!”
“Gleb!”
Seeing Nerzhin and Spiridon coming upstairs from the bathroom, they both
called out at once, each of them hoping to double his forces. Gleb was walking
toward them anyway, alarmed by their shouting and gesticulation. Any passing
idiot would have realized without hearing a word that they had gotten on to
dangerous political matters. Nerzhin went up to them quickly, and before they
could, both at once, fire contradictory questions at him, prodded each of them
in the ribs.
“Sense! Sense!”
This was the code word they had all three agreed on. If two of them were
involved in a heated argument, the third would put a stop to it by reminding
them in this way of the danger of informers.
“Have you gone mad? You’ve already earned yourselves another tenner each.
Aren’t you satisfied? Dmitri! Think of your family!”
There was no hope of parting them peacefully—or, for that matter, with a jet
from a hose.
“Just listen to him!” Sologdin said, shaking Gleb by the shoulder. “He sets
all our sufferings at nought. They’re warranted as far as he’s concerned. The
only sufferings he cares about are those of Negroes on plantations!”
“Well, I’ve told Lev before, charity begins at home.”
“What narrowness! You’re no internationalist!” Rubin exclaimed, glaring at
Nerzhin as though he were a pickpocket caught in the act. “You should have
heard the rot he’s been talking. He thinks the autocracy was a blessing for
Russia! All our conquests, all our dirty tricks, the Straits, Poland, Central
Asia. . . .”
Nerzhin’s verdict was swift and firm. “In my view, it’s high time we set all
our colonies free, for the salvation of Russia, and concentrated our people’s
efforts on the internal development of the country.”
“That’s childish!” Sologdin retorted peevishly. “If you had a free hand, you’d
shake the land of your fathers to pieces. . . . You tell him—is all that
Komsomol romanticism of theirs worth a bent kopeck? Remember how they
taught peasant children to denounce their parents? How they wouldn’t leave
those who’d grown the grain so much as husks to choke on? And he has the
nerve to mouth the word ‘virtue’!”
“Oh, a noble soul you are! Call yourself a Christian? You’re nothing of the
sort!”
“Don’t blaspheme. Don’t talk about things you don’t understand.”
“You think that just because you aren’t a thief or an informer, that’s enough to
make you a Christian? Where’s your love for your neighbor? There’s a saying
that just fits you: The hand that makes the sign of the cross also sharpens the
knife. No wonder you’re such a fan of medieval bandits! You’re a typical
conquistador!”
“Flatterer!” Sologdin struck a picturesque pose.
“You’re flattered? Horrible, horrible!”
Rubin ran the fingers of both hands through his thinning hair. “Do you hear
him, Gleb? Tell him what a poseur he is! I’m fed up with his posturing! He’s
forever pretending to be Alexander Nevsky!”
“Now, that I don’t find a bit flattering!”
“What do you mean?”
“Alexander Nevsky is no sort of hero as far as I’m concerned. And no saint.
So I don’t take what you said as a compliment.”
Rubin was silenced. He and Nerzhin exchanged a baffled look.
“So what has Alexander Nevsky done to upset you?” Nerzhin asked.
“Kept chivalry out of Asia and Catholicism out of Russia. He was against
Europe,” Sologdin said, still breathless with indignation.
Rubin returned to the attack, hoping to land a blow.
“Now this is something new! Something quite new! . . .”
“Why would Catholicism have been good for Russia?” Nerzhin inquired,
looking judicial.
“I’ll tell you why!” The answer came like a flash of lightning. “Because all
the people who had the misfortune to be Orthodox Christians paid for it with
centuries of slavery! Because the Orthodox Church never could stand up to the
state! A godless people was defenseless! The result was this cockeyed country
of ours! A country of slaves!”
Nerzhin’s eyes were popping out.
“I just don’t understand. Wasn’t it you who blamed me for not being patriotic
enough? Now you’re giving the land of your fathers a drubbing.”
But Rubin had seen a break in his enemy’s defenses. He leaped in quickly.
“What’s become of Holy Russia? And the Language of Utter Clarity? And the
campaign against ‘birds’ words’?”
“Yes, indeed!” added Nerzhin. “What’s the point of the Language of Utter
Clarity if ours is a cockeyed country?”
Sologdin beamed. He stretched out his arms and made circular movements
with his hands.
“A game, gentlemen! A game! A joust with lowered visor! We all need
exercise! We must strive at all times to overcome resistance. We are
imprisoned for good, and we must pretend to hold views as remote as possible
from our real ones. As I’ve told you, one of the nine spheres. . . .”
“Roundnesses, you mean.”
“No, spheres!”
Rubin flared up again. “So that was humbug, too! This country isn’t good
enough for you. But who if not you reckless God botherers was responsible for
Khodynka and Tsushima and the debacle of 1915?”
Sologdin gasped.
“So the murderers’ hearts bleed for Russia now, do they? Wasn’t it you who
butchered Russia in 1917?”
“Sense! Sense!” Gleb punched both of them in the ribs again. But the
debaters were oblivious. They could no longer see him through the red mist
before their eyes.
“What makes you think you’ll ever be forgiven for collectivization?”
“Remember what you told us in Butyrki? That your only object in life was to
grab yourself a million? Why do you need a million to get to the Kingdom of
Heaven?”
They had known each other for two years. And now they were distorting all
that they had learned about each other in heart-to-heart conversations, insulting
each other as hurtfully as they could. Every little thing either of them could
recall was flung in the other’s face as an accusation.
“Don’t you understand ordinary human language?” Nerzhin croaked. “Wrap it
up! Wrap it up!”
He made a helpless gesture and left them to it. At least there was nobody else
in the hallway, and all those in the rooms were asleep.
“Shame on you! You corrupter of men’s souls! Those creatures who preside
over East Germany are your nurslings!”
“You puffed-up pygmy! How pathetically proud you are of your drop of
gentry blood!”
“If the Shishkin-Myshkins are furthering the good cause, why don’t you help
them? Why not squeal for them? Shikin, too, will give you a good report. And
they’ll review your case.”
“Talking like that could get you a bloody nose!”
“I don’t see why. Look at it this way. Since all the rest of us are rightly here,
and only you are not, our jailers must be in the right. That’s only logical.”
By now they were exchanging random insults, scarcely listening to each
other, each of them intent on one thing only—landing his blows where they
would hurt most.
“You’re an inveterate liar! Everything you do and say rests on a lie! Yet you
pontificate as though you never let go of your crucifix.”
“You didn’t want to discuss the importance of pride in a man’s life, but you
really should try to borrow a bit of pride from somewhere. Twice a year you
humbly petition them for a pardon—”
“Lies! For a review of my case, not a pardon.”
“The answer’s always no, but you go on humbly begging. You’re like a little
dog on a chain; whoever holds the chain has you in his power.”
“Wouldn’t you humbly beg if you could? In your case, release is ruled out.
Otherwise you’d crawl on your belly for it!”
Sologdin shook with indignation. “Never!”
“I tell you, you would! You just lack the means of attracting attention!”
They had tormented each other to the point of exhaustion. Innokenty Volodin
could not have imagined that his fate would be influenced by a tedious
nocturnal argument between two prisoners in a sealed and secluded building
on the outskirts of Moscow.
Each of them wanted to be executioner, but both were victims in this quarrel.
They had long ago lost the thread, and the quarrel was not really theirs, but
between two radically opposed and equally destructive forces.
Each was well aware of the other’s destructive potential. Each knew for
certain that whether yesterday’s or tomorrow’s blind and mindless conquerors
prevailed, both were as impervious to reason as those prison walls.
Rubin was almost tearing his hair.
“Tell me this, then: If you always thought as you do now, how could you join
the Komsomol?”
For the second time in half an hour, Sologdin was so exasperated that he
betrayed himself unnecessarily.
“What else could I do? Did you leave us the option of not joining? If I hadn’t
been in the Komsomol, I wouldn’t have gotten into the institute in a thousand
years. I’d have been digging ditches!”
“So you pretended? You put on a disgusting little act.”
“No! I simply went into the attack with visor lowered!”
What Rubin inferred from this was agonizing, heartstopping.
“So if there’s a war, and you get your hands on a weapon. . . .”
Sologdin raised himself to his full height, folded his arms, and backed away
from Rubin as though he had leprosy.
“You don’t think I’d defend you, do you?”
“Your words reek of blood!” Rubin clenched his hairy fists.
Whatever they said or did next—take each other by the throat, fly at each
other with fists flailing—would have been a feeble expression of their
feelings. All that was left to them was to seize machine guns and fire a burst.
That was the only language the loser would have understood.
But there were no machine guns.
They parted, breathing heavily, Rubin hanging his head, Sologdin head in the
air.
Sologdin might have hesitated earlier, but now he savored in advance the joy
of hitting those dirty dogs where it hurt! Don’t give them their encoder! Don’t
let them have it! You don’t have to be one of those pulling their triumphal
chariot! If you do, you’ll never show them up for the mediocrities they are!
They shout themselves hoarse; they deafen us with their laws of historical
inevitability: “It cannot be otherwise!” is their constant cry. They write history
the way they want it, twist the hidden causes to suit themselves.
Rubin went away to his corner and clasped his painfully throbbing head in
his hands. He saw clearly now that there was one, only one, crushing blow he
could inflict on Sologdin and the whole pack of Sologdins. The only way to
ram anything into those thick heads. No factual arguments, no historical
justification, would ever convince them that you were right! The atomic bomb
—that was the one thing they would understand! He must overcome his illness,
his weakness, his reluctance, and—first thing tomorrow morning—get his nose
down and pick up the trail of that anonymous miscreant. He must save the
atomic bomb for the Revolution!
Petrov! Syagovity! Volodin! Shchevronok! Zavarzin!