Chapter-26-Sawing-Wood

ITWAS GETTING LIGHT.
Thick frost had trimmed with white the fence posts of the prison area and the
outer security zone, the barbed wire in tangles of twenty strands at a time,
bristling with thousands of spiky asterisks, the sloping roof of the watchtower,
and the weeds running wild on the wasteland beyond the wire.
Dmitri Sologdin admired this miracle with unshaded eyes. He was standing
near the sawhorse. He was wearing a padded jacket, prison-camp issue, over
blue overalls, and his head, on which the first traces of gray could be seen,
was uncovered. He was a nonentity, a slave without rights. He had been inside
for twelve years, but because he had been sentenced to a second term, there
was no knowing when, if ever, his imprisonment would end. His wife had
wasted her youth waiting in vain for him. To avoid dismissal from her present
job, as from so many others, she had pretended that she had no husband and
had stopped writing to him. Sologdin had never seen his only son—his wife
had been pregnant when he was arrested. Sologdin had gone through the forests
of Cherdynsk, the mines of Vorkuta, two periods under investigation, one of six
months, one of a year, tormented by lack of sleep, drained of his strength,
wasting away. His name and his future had long ago been trampled into the
mud. All he possessed was a pair of well-worn padded trousers and a
tarpaulin work jacket, kept at present in the storeroom in expectation of worse
times to come. He was paid thirty rubles a month—enough for three kilos of
sugar—but not in cash. He could breathe fresh air only at stated times
authorized by the prison authorities.
And in his soul there was a peace that nothing could destroy. His eyes
sparkled like those of a young man. His chest, bared to the frost, heaved as
though he were experiencing life to the full.
LONG AGO, when he had been under interrogation, his muscles were shriveled
ropes, but they had expanded and grown firm again, and they demanded
exercise. That was why, quite voluntarily and for no reward, he went out every
morning to chop and saw wood for the prison kitchen.
But ax and saw can be terrible weapons in a convict’s hands, and they were
not readily entrusted to him. The prison authorities were paid to suspect that
the convict’s most innocent act is a treacherous ruse; they judged others by
themselves, refused to believe that a man would volunteer to work for nothing,
stubbornly suspected Sologdin of planning his escape or armed mutiny,
especially as there were hints of both in his record. Standing orders therefore
provided that a guard should position himself five paces away from Sologdin
while he worked, out of range of his ax but watching every movement. There
were guards willing to perform this dangerous duty, and the prison authorities,
reared in the admirable ways of the Gulag, did not think one watcher to one
worker a waste of manpower. But Sologdin turned obstinate and aggravated
their suspicions by declaring that he would not work in the presence of a
“screw.” That was the end of his woodchopping for a time. (The prison
governor could not coerce prisoners. This was not a prison camp. The inmates
here were engaged in intellectual labor and did not come under his ministry.)
The real trouble was that the planners and accountants had made no provision
for this work, and the women who came from outside to cook the prisoners’
food refused to chop wood because they were not paid extra for it. The
authorities tried detailing off-duty guards to do the job, tearing them away from
their dominoes in the orderly room. The guards were all blockheads,
handpicked as young men for their physical fitness. But during their years of
service in prisons, they seemed to have lost the habit of work—their backs
soon started aching, and the pull of the dominoes was strong. They just
couldn’t produce enough firewood, so the governor had to give in and
authorize Sologdin and any other prisoners who turned up (usually Nerzhin and
Rubin) to chop and saw without additional surveillance. The sentry on the
watchtower could in any case see them clearly, and the duty officers, too, were
told to keep an eye on them.
As darkness retreated and the waning lamplight merged with the light of day,
the rotund figure of Spiridon the yardman appeared from around the corner of
the building. He was wearing a fur hat with earflaps—no other prisoner had
been given one—and a quilted jacket. The yardman was also a convict but one
subordinate to the commandant of the institute, not to the prison authorities. To
keep the peace, he sharpened the axes and saw for the prison, too. As he got
nearer, Sologdin could see the missing saw in his hands.
Spiridon Yegorov walked around the yard, which was guarded by machine
guns, at all hours from reveille to lights out, without escort. One reason why
the authorities felt able to relax the rules was that Spiridon was blind in one
eye and had only thirty percent vision in the other. The sharashka’s budget
provided for three yardmen because the yard was really several yards joined
together, two hectares in area, but Spiridon, unaware of this, did the work of
all three and felt none the worse for it. What mattered was that here he could
“eat his bellyful,” at least a kilo and a half of black bread, because there was
plenty of bread and to spare, and the men let him have some of their gruel.
Spiridon was conspicuously fitter, and plumper, than he had been in Sev-UralLag,
where he had acted as nanny to many thousands of logs.
“Hey, Spiridon!” Sologdin called out impatiently.
His face, with its graying ginger mustache and graying ginger eyebrows, was
very mobile and, when he was answering someone, often expressed eagerness
to oblige. As it did now. Sologdin did not know that this exaggerated show of
helpfulness was often derisive.
“What d’you mean what’s the matter? The saw won’t cut!”
“I can’t think why,” Spiridon said, sounding surprised. “You’ve complained
about it I don’t know how many times this winter. Let’s have a try.”
He held the saw by one handle.
They began sawing. The saw jumped out once or twice, trying to change its
place because it wasn’t lying comfortably, but then it sank its teeth in and was
on its way.
“You grip it awful hard,” Spiridon cautiously advised him. “Just get three
fingers around the handle like around a pen and move nice and easy, smooth
like . . . that’s it . . . you’ve got it! Only when you pull it toward you, don’t tug
at it.”
Each man believed himself superior to the other: Sologdin because he knew
all about mechanics, the resistance of metals, and other scientific matters, and
also because of his broad grasp of social issues; Spiridon because material
objects always obeyed him. Sologdin, however, patronized the yardman
openly, whereas Spiridon hid his feelings.
Even halfway through the thick log, the saw never seemed to be sticking; it
cut away with a thin whine, sputtering pine shavings onto the two men’s
overalls.
Sologdin burst out laughing.
“You’re a wizard. Spiridon! You had me fooled. You sharpened the saw and
set it yesterday.”
Spiridon complacently chanted in time to the saw. “She chews and chews
and never swallows, but all her sawdust gives to others.”
And before the saw was through, the butt of the log fell off under the pressure
of his hand.
“I didn’t sharpen it at all,” he said, turning the saw over so that Sologdin
could see the cutting edge. “You can see the teeth are just the same today as
they were yesterday.”
Sologdin bent down to look at the saw and could see no file marks. But the
rascal had certainly done something to it.
“Come on, Spiridon, let’s cut another length.”
Spiridon held his back. “No, I can’t. I’m all worn-out. All the work my
grandfathers and great-grandfathers didn’t do has landed on me. Anyway, your
pals will be here soon.”
Sologdin’s friends, however, were in no hurry.
It was now broad daylight. A morning magnificently adorned with hoarfrost
stood revealed. Even the drainpipes, and the ground itself, were decked with
hoarfrost, and in the distance the tops of the lime trees in the exercise yard
wore splendid silvery gray manes.
“How did you land in the sharashka, Spiridon?” Sologdin asked, looking
closely at the yardman.
He was killing time. In all his years in the camps, he had associated only
with educated people, expecting to glean nothing worthwhile from less
cultured prisoners.
Spiridon smacked his lips. “You may well ask. You’re all learned folk, you
and all the others they’ve lumped together in this place, and here am I thrown
in with you. On my card it says I’m a glassblower. Well, I was a glassblower
once, at our factory near Bryansk. But that’s a long time ago, and now my
eyesight’s gone, and the work I did is no use in this place; what they want here
is a really clever glassblower, like Ivan. There wasn’t another like him in our
whole factory, and never had been. But they just took a peek at my card and
brought me here. Then they took a good look at me and were going to send me
packing, but the commandant, God bless him, took me on as a yardman.”
Nerzhin came around the corner from the direction of the exercise yard and
the one-story staff building. He was wearing unbuttoned overalls, a padded
jacket draped around his shoulders, and a towel, prison issue, as broad as it
was long, around his neck.
He greeted them abruptly—“Morning, friends”—shedding garments,
stripping off the upper part of his denims, and removing his undershirt as he
came.
Sologdin looked askance at him. “Gleb, my boy, are you crazy? Where’s the
snow?”
“Right here,” Nerzhin retorted, scrambling onto the roof of the woodshed,
where there was a virgin layer of something fluffy that was partly snow and
partly hoarfrost. He scooped up handfuls of it and began vigorously rubbing
chest, back, and sides. He rubbed himself with snow down to the waist all
through the winter, although any guard who chanced to be near would try to
stop him.
Spiridon shook his head: “Look what a sweat you’re in now.”
“Still no letter, Spiridon Danilovich?” Nerzhin called out.
“This time there was a letter for me.”
“So why haven’t you brought it for me to read? Is everything all right?”
“There was a letter, but I can’t get it. The Snake’s kept it.”
“Myshin? Won’t he hand it over?” Nerzhin stopped rubbing himself.
“He put my name on the list, but the commandant had me cleaning out the
attic, and before I knew it, the Snake had shut up shop. It’ll be Monday now.”
“The scoundrels!” Nerzhin sighed, baring his teeth.
Spiridon waved it away.
“Don’t damn the priests—leave it to the devil,” he said, with one eye on
Sologdin, whom he didn’t know well. “All right, I’m off.”
In his big fur hat, with its flaps untied, Spiridon looked like a comically flopeared
mongrel as he set off for the guardroom, to which no other prisoner was
admitted.
“Spiridon!”
Sologdin suddenly remembered and called after him. “What about the ax?
Where’s the ax?”
“The duty guard will bring it,” Spiridon shouted back, and vanished.
“Well,” said Nerzhin, vigorously rubbing his chest and back with his scrap of
terry toweling. “I didn’t come up to Anton’s expectations. He says I treat
Number Seven like ‘a drunk’s corpse under Marfino’s fence.’ Then yesterday
evening he offered me a transfer to the cryptography group, but I refused.”
A slight movement of Sologdin’s head and a grin perhaps expressed
disapproval. Between his neatly clipped graying ginger mustache and matching
beard, his smile revealed sparkling white teeth, sound teeth untouched by
decay. The gaps had been made by outside forces.
“You’re behaving more like a bard than a reckoner,” he said.
Nerzhin was not surprised: “Mathematician” and “poet” had been replaced,
in accordance with Sologdin’s well-known whimsical habit of speaking the
Language of Ultimate Clarity and not using “bird language,” that is, foreign
words.
Still half naked, unhurriedly toweling himself, Nerzhin gloomily agreed.
“Yes, it’s not like me. But I suddenly felt so sick of it all that I didn’t care
anymore. If I go to Siberia, I go to Siberia. . . . I’m sorry to find that Lyovka is
right—I’m a failure as a skeptic. Obviously skepticism isn’t just a system of
ideas; it’s mainly a matter of character. I want to intervene in what goes on.
May even give somebody a smack in the chops.”
Sologdin found a more comfortable position against the sawhorse.
“It gives me deep joy, my friend. Your hardened unbelief” (meaning what
was called “skepticism” in the Language of Seeming Clarity) “was
unavoidable on the road away from . . . the satanic drug” (he meant
“Marxism,” but he couldn’t think of a Russian synonym for it) “to the world of
truth. You are no longer a boy” (Sologdin was six years older); “you must find
yourself spiritually, understand the relation between good and evil in human
life. And you must choose.”
Sologdin looked meaningfully at Nerzhin, who, however, showed no
inclination to choose between good and evil then and there. He put on his shirt,
which was too small, and answered back as he thrust his arms into his overall
sleeves.
“That’s a weighty statement. But shouldn’t you also be reminding me that
‘reason is feeble’ and that I myself am the ‘source of error’?”
He rounded on his friend as though struck by a new thought.
“Look, you’re supposed to have the ‘light of truth’ in you, yet you say that
prostitution is morally beneficial, and that Dantes was in the right when he
fought his duel with Pushkin.”
Sologdin smiled complacently, baring a defective set of longish teeth with
rounded edges.
“Well, didn’t I successfully defend those propositions?”
“Yes, but the thought that in the same skull, the same breast. . . .”
“That’s life. You must get used to it. I freely admit that I’m like one of those
wooden eggs you can take apart. I am made up of nine spheres, one inside the
other.”
“ ‘Sphere’ is bird talk!”
“Sorry. You see how uninventive I am. I am made of nine roundnesses. It is
not often that I let anyone see the inner ones. Don’t forget that we live with our
visors down. We have been forced to. And anyway, we are more complex than
the people depicted in novels. Writers try to explain people completely, but in
real life we never get to know anyone completely. That’s why I love
Dostoevsky. Stavrogin, Svidrigailov, Kirillov. What are they really like? The
closer you get, the less you understand them.”
“Stavrogin? Which book is he in?”
“The Possessed. Haven’t you read it?” Sologdin was astonished.
Nerzhin draped his damp, skimpy towel around his neck like a muffler and
pulled on his officer’s service cap, which was so old that it was coming apart
at the seams.
“The Possessed? Come off it. Where d’you think my generation could get
hold of it? It’s counterrevolutionary literature! Too dangerous!”
He put on his jacket.
“Anyway, I don’t agree. When a new arrival crosses the threshold of your
cell, you hang down from your bunk and your eyes bore into him—is he friend
or enemy? You size him up in a flash. And, surprisingly, you’re never mistaken.
Is it really as difficult as you say to understand a man? Remember how you and
I first met. You arrived in the sharashka when the washbasin was still out on
the main stairway, right?”
“Right.”
“It was morning, and I was on my way downstairs, whistling some silly little
tune. You were drying yourself, and you suddenly raised your face from the
towel in the half darkness. I was rooted to the spot. It was like looking at the
face in an icon. Later on I looked more closely, and you were by no means a
saint—I don’t mean to flatter you. . . .”
Sologdin laughed.
“. . . Your face isn’t at all gentle, but it is unusual. I felt at once that I could
trust you, and after five minutes I was telling you. . . .”
“I was staggered by your rashness.”
“But a man with eyes like yours can’t be a stoolie!”
“It’s too bad if I’m so easy to read. In a camp you need to look nondescript.”
“Then that same day, when I’d been listening to your evangelical revelations,
I tempted you with a question. . . .”
“Of the Karamazov variety.”
“Ah, you remember! I asked you what should be done with professional
criminals. Remember what you said? ‘Shoot the lot!’ Right?”
Nerzhin, now as then, looked hard at Sologdin, as though giving him a chance
to retract.
But the bright blue of Dmitri Sologdin’s eyes was untroubled. He folded his
arms picturesquely over his chest, one of his most becoming poses, and loftily
declared, “My friend! They who want to destroy Christianity, and only they,
would have it become the creed of eunuchs. But Christianity is the faith of the
strong in spirit. We must have the courage to see the evil in the world and to
root it out. Wait a while—you, too, will come to God. Your refusal to believe
in anything is no position for a thinking man; it’s just spiritual poverty.”
Nerzhin sighed.
“You know, I don’t even mind acknowledging a Creator, some sort of Higher
Reason in the universe. I’ll even say that I feel it to be so, if you want me to.
But supposing I found out that there is no God, would I be any less moral?”
“Undoubtedly!”
“I don’t think so. And why do you have to insist, why do all of you always
insist, that we must recognize not just God in some general sense but a concrete
Christian God, plus the Trinity, plus the Immaculate Conception? Would my
philosophical deism be the least bit shaken if I learn that not one of the Gospel
miracles ever happened? Of course it wouldn’t!”
Sologdin sternly raised a hand with an admonitory finger.
“There’s no other way! If you begin to doubt a single dogma of the faith, a
single word of the scriptures, all is lost! You are one of the godless!”
His hand slashed the air as though it held a saber.
“That’s what repels people! All or nothing! No compromises, no allowances
made. But suppose I can’t accept it in toto? What can I be sure of? What can I
rely on? I keep telling you—the one thing I know is that I know nothing.”
Socrates’ apprentice took hold of the saw and offered the other handle to
Sologdin.
“Another time, then,” Sologdin agreed. “Let’s cut wood.”
They had begun to feel the cold, and they sawed away briskly. Powdered
brown bark sputtered from under the saw. The job had been done more
skillfully with Spiridon at the other end of the saw, but after many mornings
working together, the friends got along without recriminations. They sawed
with the zeal and enjoyment of men whose work is not performed under duress
or the lash of poverty.
Sologdin, flushed scarlet, growled once, when they were about to cut their
fourth log: “Just try not to snag the saw.”
And after the fourth log was cut, Nerzhin muttered: “It was a knotty one, all
right, that bastard.”
Fragrant shavings, some white, some yellow, fell on the trousers and shoes of
the sawyers at each swish of the saw. This rhythmical work soothed them and
re-tuned their thoughts.
Nerzhin had awakened in a bad mood, but now he was thinking that camp life
had left him stunned only for the first year. Now that he had his second wind,
he would not fight tooth and nail for a trusty’s job, he would not be afraid of
general duties; now that he knew better what really mattered, he would join the
morning work parade in his padded jacket, smirched with plaster or fuel oil,
and slowly stick at it for the whole twelve-hour day, day in and day out for the
five remaining years of his sentence: Five years wasn’t ten years; five years
you could survive. You just had to keep reminding yourself that prison was not
just a curse—it was also a blessing.
These were his thoughts as he took alternate pulls at the saw. He could not
possibly imagine that his partner, as he pulled the saw his way, thought of
prison only as an unmitigated curse, from which he must sooner or later break
free.
Sologdin was thinking now about his great secret achievement of the past
few months, which held the promise of freedom. He would learn the definitive
verdict on his work after breakfast, and he knew in advance that it would be
favorable. Sologdin swelled with pride at the thought that his brain, exhausted
by so many years of interrogation, and then of hunger in the camps, starved for
so many years of phosphorus, had still succeeded in mastering a major
engineering problem! How often we notice it in men approaching their forties
—that sudden uprush of vital forces! Especially if the surplus energy of the
flesh is not expended in procreation but mysteriously transmuted into powerful
thought.