Chapter-01-Torpedo

THE FILIGREED HANDS POINTED to five minutes past four.
The bronze of the clock was lusterless in the dying light of a December day.
A high window, beginning at floor level, looked down on bustling Kuznetsky
Most. Yardmen trudged doggedly to and fro, scraping up fresh snow that was
already caking and turning brown under the feet of pedestrians.
State Counselor Grade Two Innokenty Volodin surveyed all this unseeingly,
lolling against the edge of the embrasure and whistling something long drawn
out and elusive. His fingertips flipped through the pages of a glossy foreign
magazine, but he had no eyes for them.
Volodin State Counselor Grade Two—the diplomatic-service equivalent of
lieutenant colonel—was tall and narrow-shouldered and wore a suit of some
silky material instead of his uniform, looking more like a well-off young drone
than an official of some importance in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
It was time to switch the lights on or go home, but he stayed where he was.
Four o’clock was not the end of the working day but only of its daytime part.
Everyone would now go home, have something to eat, and take a nap; then at
10:00 p.m. the thousands and thousands of windows in forty-five All-Union
and twenty Union-Republican ministries would light up again. A single
individual ringed by a dozen fortress walls could not sleep at night, and he had
trained the whole of official Moscow to stay awake with him until three or four
in the morning. Knowing the peculiar nocturnal habits of their lord and master,
all sixty-odd ministers kept vigil, like schoolboys awaiting a summons from
the headmaster. To fight off sleep they would summon their deputies; then
deputy ministers would rouse department heads, research officers would erect
ladders and swarm over card indexes, clerks would charge along hallways,
and stenographers would break their pencil points.
Today was no exception. It was Christmas Eve on Western calendars. All the
embassies had fallen silent and given up calling two days ago, but the ministry
would be staying up through the night just the same.
They—the Western diplomats—had two weeks of vacation ahead of them.
Trusting babes! Stupid donkeys!
The young man’s nervous fingers paged through the magazine hastily,
mechanically, while hot waves of terror welled up inside him, then subsided,
leaving him cold.
Innokenty flung the magazine away and began pacing the room, shuddering.
Should he call or shouldn’t he? Did it have to be now? Would Thursday or
Friday be too late over there?
Too late. . . . There was so little time to think about it, and absolutely nobody
to ask for advice!
Surely there was no way of finding out who had made a call from a phone
booth? If he spoke only in Russian? If he didn’t hang around but walked away
quickly? Surely they couldn’t identify a muffled voice over the telephone? It
must be a technical impossibility.
In three or four days’ time he would be flying there himself. It would be more
logical to wait. More sensible.
But it would be too late.
Oh, hell! His shoulders, unused to such burdens, hunched in a shiver. It
would have been better if he had never found out. Better not to know.
He scooped up all the papers on his desk and carried them to the safe. His
agitation grew. Innokenty lowered his brow onto the dull-painted iron of the
safe and rested there with closed eyes.
Then suddenly, as though he felt his last chance slipping away from him,
without calling for a car, without so much as closing his inkwell, Innokenty
rushed for the door, locked it, handed his key to the guard at the end of the
hallway, almost ran down the stairs, overtaking the usual gold-braided
personages, dived into his overcoat, planted his hat on his head, and ran out
into the damp twilight.
Rapid motion brought him some relief.
His low French shoes, worn fashionably without galoshes, sank into the
slush.
As he passed the Vorovsky Monument in the ministry courtyard, Innokenty
looked up and shuddered. The building of the Great Lubyanka, which looked
out on Furkasov Passage, suddenly took on a new significance for him. This
gray-black nine-storied hulk was a battleship, and the eighteen pilasters
loomed like eighteen gun turrets on its starboard side. And Innokenty’s tiny
craft was being helplessly sucked into its path, under the bows of the swift,
heavy vessel.
Or no—he wasn’t a helpless captive canoe; he was deliberately heading
toward the battleship like a torpedo!
He could hold out no longer! He turned right onto Kuznetsky Most. A taxi
was about to pull away from the curb. Innokenty grabbed it, hurried the driver
downhill, then told him to turn left, under the newly lit streetlights of the
Petrovka.
He still couldn’t decide where to make his call—where he could be sure that
no one would be hovering impatiently, distracting him, peering through the
door. But if he looked for a single phone booth in some quiet spot, he would
make himself more conspicuous. Wouldn’t it be better to pick one in the thick
of it all, as long as it had soundproof brick or stone walls? And how stupid he
had been to chase around in a taxi and make the driver a witness. He dug into
his pocket, hoping not to find the fifteen kopecks for the call. If he didn’t, he
could obviously put it off.
At the traffic light on Okhotny Ryad, his fingers felt and drew out two fifteenkopeck
pieces simultaneously. So that was that.
It seemed to calm him down. Dangerous or not, he had no alternative.
If we live in a state of constant fear, can we remain human?
Without intending it, Innokenty now found himself riding along the
Mokhovaya past the embassy. Fate was taking a hand. He pressed his face
against the window, craning his neck, trying unsuccessfully to make out which
windows were lit up.
They passed the university, and Innokenty motioned to the right. It was as
though he were circling on his torpedo to position it properly.
They sped up to the Arbat; Innokenty gave the driver two bills, stepped out,
and crossed the square, trying to moderate his pace.
His throat and his mouth were dry with the dryness that no drink can help.
By now the Arbat was all lit up. In front of the Khudozhestvenny Cinema,
there was a long line for The Ballerina’s Romance. A faint bluish mist clouded
the red M above the metro station. A woman with a dark southern complexion
was selling little yellow flowers. The doomed man could no longer see the
battleship, but his breast was bursting with desperate resolve.
Remember, though: not a word in English. Let alone French. Mustn’t leave
the smallest clue for the tracker dogs.
Innokenty walked on, erect and no longer hurrying. A girl eyed him as he
passed.
And another one. Very pretty, too. Wish me well out of it!
How big the world is and how full of opportunities! But all that’s left for you
is this narrow passage.
One of the wooden booths outside the station was empty but seemed to have
a broken window. Innokenty walked on, into the station.
Here the four booths set into the wall were all occupied. But in the one to the
left, a rough-looking character, not quite sober, was finishing his call and
hanging up the receiver. He smiled at Innokenty and started to say something.
Innokenty took his place in the booth, carefully pulled the thick-paned door
closed, and held it shut with one hand; the other, still gloved, trembled as it
dropped a coin into the slot and dialed a number.
After several prolonged buzzes the receiver was lifted at the other end.
“Is this the secretariat?” Innokenty asked, trying to disguise his voice.
“Yes.”
“Please put me through to the ambassador immediately.”
The answer came in very good Russian.
“I can’t call the ambassador. What is your business?”
“Give me the chargé then! Or the military attaché! Please be quick!”
There was a pause for thought at the other end. Innokenty put himself in fate’s
hands: If they refused—let it go at that, don’t try a second time.
“Very well, I’m connecting you with the attaché.”
He heard them making the connection.
Through the thick glass he saw people passing, within inches of the row of
phone booths, hurrying, overtaking one another. One person peeled off and
stood impatiently waiting his turn outside Innokenty’s booth.
Somebody with a thick accent and a well-fed, indolent voice spoke into the
telephone:
“Hello. What did you want?”
“Is this the military attaché?” Innokenty asked brusquely.
“Yes, air attaché,” drawled the voice at the other end.
What next? Shielding the receiver with his hand, Innokenty spoke in a low
but urgent voice:
“Mr. Air Attaché! Please write this down and pass it to the ambassador
immediately.”
“Just a moment,” the leisurely voice answered, “I’ll call an interpreter.”
“I can’t wait!” Innokenty was seething. And he had dropped his attempt to
disguise his voice. “And I will not talk to any Soviet person! Do not put the
receiver down! This is a life-and-death matter for your country! And not only
your country! Listen! Within the next few days a Soviet agent called Georgy
Koval will pick something up at a shop selling radio parts; the address is—”
“I don’t quite understand,” the attaché calmly replied in halting Russian. He,
of course, was sitting on a comfortable sofa, and no one was on his trail.
Animated female voices could be heard in the background.
“Call the Canadian Embassy. They have good Russian speakers there.”
The phone booth floor was burning under Innokenty’s feet, and the black
receiver with its heavy steel chain melting in his hand. But a single foreign
word could destroy him!
“Listen! Listen!” he cried in despair. “In a few days’ time the Soviet agent
Koval will be given important technological information about the production
of the atomic bomb, at a radio shop—”
“What? Which avenue?” The attaché sounded surprised. He thought a
moment.
“Who are you, anyway? How do I know you’re speaking the truth?”
“Do you know what a risk I’m taking?” Innokenty shot back. Somebody
seemed to be knocking on the glass behind him. The attaché was silent.
Perhaps taking a long puff at his cigarette.
“The atomic bomb?” he repeated dubiously. “But who are you? Tell me your
name.”
There was a muffled click, and dead silence followed, unbroken by crackling
or buzzing.
They had been cut off.